374 THE PELOPONNESlAK WAR. B.VHI.

About the same space of time, Alcibiades also* at the

head of his squadron of thirteeri sail, returned from

Caunus and Phasclis into the harbour of SamoS; report­

ing that " by his management he had diverted the

"junction of the Phœnician fleet with the Peloponne-

"sians, and made Tissaphernes a faster friend than

*' ever to the Athenians." After enlarging his squa­  
dron by the addition of nine more just manned, he le­

vied large contributions upon the Halicarnasseans,-ahd

fortified Cos. After these exploits, and putting the

government of Cos into proper hands, he returned a-

gain, about autumn, to Samos.*

From Aspendus also Tissaphernes rode back post­

haste into Ionia, so soon as advised of the departure of

the Peloponnesian fleet from Miletus for the Helles­

pont.

Buti as the Peloponnesians were now in the Helles­

pont, the Antandrians, (who are of Æolic descent,)

* As the English reader is here to take his leave of Alcibiades-, he may have the

curiosity to know what became of him after. — Every thing succeeded so well,
under

him and his active collegues, that the Lacedæmonians, having received several
de­

feats ooth by land and sea, and lost two hundred ships, were again
necessitated to sue

for peace. After such great services, Alcibiad-s returned triumphant to
Athens,

The whole city flocked down to the Piræus to meet hirfc. All strove to get a
fight

of Alcibiades; they caressed him, crowned him, cursed the authors of his
exile, and

hurried him away to an assembly of the people. There he harangued them fora
tinttj

then flopped and ihed teats in abundance; then harangued them again. In
fliott,

they undid all they had ever done against him ; and Alcibiades for a time was
all in

all at Athens. Yet, in subsf auent commands, he happened not to be successful
j 1

crime which his countrymen very seldom forgave. He became a second time an
aile

from Athens. His great abilities made him a continual terror, both to foreign
and

domestic enemies.' Yet now he persevered to serve his country, by caballing in
their

favour, and advising them on critical occasions. Yec all in vain j Lysander
was soon

master of the Piræus and of Athens. Alcibiades retired into Phrygia, and was
hand­

somely supported by the bounty of his friend Pharnabazus; who however was

wrought upon at last, by the joint solicitations of his em mies and the plea
of its

necessity for the service of the king, to undertake hit destruction. The
agents of

Pharnabazus durst not attempt him in an open manner, but set fire to his house
by

night. By-throwing in clothes to damp the flames he got out safe. The
Barbarians

soon spied him, ihot him to death with arrows and darts, then cut off his
bead, and

carried it to Pharnabazus. I shall only add, that he was birt forty years old
when he

was thus destroyed,

haying

