366 THE DECLINE AND FALL

column was sustained on the broad and sinewy back of the gigantic slave. Ths

foremost in this painful ascent could grasp and climb the lowest part of the
battle­

ments; they silently stabbed and cast down the sentinels; and the thirty
brethren

repeating a pious ejaculation, "O apostle of God, help and deliver us!" were
suc­

cessively drawn up by the long folds of their turbans. With bold and cautious
foot­

steps, Dames explored the palace of the governor, who celebrated in riotous
mer­

riment, the festival of his deliverance. From thence returning to his
companions,

he assaulted on the inside the entrance of the castle. They overpowered the

guard, unbolted the gate, let down the drawbridge, and defended the narrow
pass,

till the arrival of Caled, with the dawn of day, relieved their danger and
assured

their conquest. Youkinna, a formidable foe, became an active and useful prose­

lyte; and the general of the Saracens expressed his regard for the most humble

merit, by detaining the army at Aleppo till Dames was cured of his honourable

wounds. The capital of Syria was still covered by the castle of Azaz and the
iron

bridge of the Orontes. After the loss of these important posts, and the defeat
of

the last of the Roman armies, the luxury of Ahtioch(l) trembled and obeyed.

Her safety was ransomed with three hundred thousand pieces of gold; but the

throne of the successors of Alexander, the seat of the Roman government in the

east, which had been decorated by Cssar with the titles of free, and holy, and
in­

violate, was degraded under the yoke of the caliphs to the secondary rank of a

provincial town. (2)

In the life of Heraclius, the glories of the Persian war are clouded on either

hand by the disgrace and weakness of his more early and his later days. When

the successors of Mahomet unsheathed the sword of war and religion, he was as­

tonished at the boundless prospect of toil and danger; his nature was
indolent, nor

could the infirm and frigid age of the emperor be kindled to a second effort.
The

sense of shame, and the importunities of the Syrians, prevented his hasty
depar­

ture from the scene of action; but the hero was no more; and the loss of
Damascus

and Jerusalem, the bloody fields of Aiznadin and Yermuk, may be imputed in

some degree to the absence or misconduct of the sovereign. Instead of
defending

the sepulchre of Christ, he involved trre church and state in a metaphysical
contro­

versy for the unity of his will; and while Heraclius crowned the offspring of
his se­

cond nuptials, he was tamely stripped of the most valuable part of their
inheritance.

In the cathedral of Atitioch, in the presence of the bishops, at the foot of
the cru­

cifix, he bewailed the sins of the prince and people; but his confession
instructed the

world, that it was in vain, and perhaps impious, to resist the judgment of
God.

The Saracens were invincible in fact, since they were invincible in opinion;
and the

desertion of Youkinna, his false repentance and repeated perfidy might justify
the

suspicion of the emperor, that he was encompassed by tr aitors and apostates,
who

conspired to betray his person, and their country to the enemies of Christ. In
the

hour of adversity, his superstition was agitated by the omens and dreams of a
fall­

ing crown; ami, after bidding an eternal farewell to Syria, he secretly
embarked

with a few attendants, and absolved the faith of his subjects. (3)
Constantine, his

eldest son, had been stationed with forty thousand men at Crcsarea, the civil
metro­

polis of the three provinces of Palestine. But his private interest recalled
him to

the Byzantine court; and, after the flight of his father, he felt himself an
unequal

champion to the united force of the caliph. His vanguard was boldly attacked
by

three hundred Arabs, and a thousand black slaves, who, in the depth of winter,

had climbed the snowy mountains of Libanus. and who were speedily followed by

the victorious squadrons of Caled himself. From the north and south the troops

of Antioch and Jerusalem advanced along the sea-shore, till their banners were

joined under the walls of the Phoenician cities: Tripoli and Tyre were
betrayed;

and a fleet of fifty transports, which entered with distrust the captive
harbours,

(1) Till* date of the conquest of Antioch by the Arabs is of some importance.
By comparing the years of the

■wont! in the chronography of Thi'ophanes with the years of the Hegira in the
history of Rlmncin. sve shaM de­

termine, that it was taken between January 23 and September 1, of the year of
Christ 638 (Paei, Critics, in Ba­

ron. Annul, torn. ii. p. 812, 313.) At Wakidi;Oekley, vo'. i. p. 314.) assigns
that event to Tuesday, AsigustSl,

an inconsistent date; sinee Easier fell that year on April 5, the 21st of
August must have been a Fridft). (See

the Tables of the Al t do Verifier les Dates.)

(2) His bounteous edict, which tempted the grateful city to assume the victory
of Pharsalia for a perpetual

era, U given iv AvTic%i»:i r>; /tsiTsewsA.;!, <(f* six. ao-uXcu, xzi
rturcie/**, z»i *f%eva->i xxt jrS5najpy*iviI rtfg emtrejuie.

John Melala.in Chron. p. 91. edit. Venet. We may distinguish his authentic
information of domestic facts

from his gross ignorance of general history.

£3) See Ockley (vol. i. p. 308—312.,) who laughs at the credulity of his
author. When Heraclius bade fare­

well to Syria, Vale Syria et ultimuni vale, he prophesied that the Romans
sliould nesier re-enter the province

till the birth of an inauspicious child, the future scourge of the entire.
Abttlfeda, p. 69. I am perfectlv igoc*

rant of the mysti*. tenie, or nonsense, of this prediction. ■ .1

