420 the decline and fall

the inhabitants of the dependant districts. They were surrounded and taken by

assault; but Tarsus was reduced by the slow progress of famine; and no sooner

had the Saracens yielded on honourable terms, than they were mortified by the

distant and unprofitable view of the naval succours of Egypt. They were dis­

missed with a safe conduct to the confines of Syria; a part of the old
Christians

had quietly lived under their dominion, and the vacant habitations were reple­

nished by a new colony. But the moscli was converted into a stable; the pulpit

was delivered to the flames; many rich crosses of gold and gems, the spoils of

Asiatic churches, were made a grateful offering to the piety or avarice of the
em­

peror; and he transported the gates of Mopsuestia and Tarsus, which were fixed

in the wall of Constantinople, an eternal monument of his victory. After they

had forced and secured the narrow passes of mount Amanus, the two Roman

princes repeatedly carried their arms into the heart of Syria. Yet instead of
as­

saulting the walls of Antioch, the humanity or superstition of Nicephorus
appeared

to respect the ancient metropolis of the east: he contented himself with
drawing

round the city a line of circumvallation; left a stationary army; and
instructed his

lieutenant to expect, without impatience, the return of spring. But in the
depth

of winter, in a dark and rainy night, an adventurous subaltern, with three
hun­

dred soldiers, approached the rampart, applied his scaliug-ladders, occupied
two

adjacent towers, stood firm against the pressure of multitudes, and bravely
main­

tained his post till he was relieved by the tardy, though effectual support of
his

reluctant chief. The first tumult of slaughter and rapine subsided; the reign
of

Caesar and of Christ was restored; and the efforts of a hundred thousand
Saracens,

and of the armies of Syria and the fleets of Africa, were consumed without
effect

before the walls of Antioch. The royal city of Aleppo was subject to
Seifeddow-

lat, of the dynasty of Hamaden, who clouded his past, glory by the precipitate
re­

treat which abandoned his kingdom and capital to the Roman invaders. In his

stately palace, that stood without the walls of Aleppo, they joyfully seized a
well-

furnished magazine of arms, a stable of fourteen hundred mules, and three hun­

dred bags of silver and gold. But the walls of the city withstood the strokes
of

their battering rams: and the besiegers pitched their tents on the
neighbouring

mountain of Jaushan. Their retreat exasperated the quarrel of the townsmen and

mercenaries; the guard of the gates and ramparts was deserted; and, while they

furiously charged each other in the market place, they were surprised and de­

stroyed by the sword of a common enemy. The male sex was exterminated by

the sword: ten thousand youths were led into captivity: the weight of the
precious

spoil exceeded the strength and number of the beasts of burden; the
superfluous

remainder was burnt: and, after a licentious possession of ten days, the Bo-

mans marched away from the naked and bleeding city. In their Syrian inroads,

they commanded the husbandmen to cultivate their lands, that they themselves,

the ensuing season, might reap the benefit; more than a hundred cities were
re­

duced to obedience; and eighteen pulpits of the principal moschs were
committed

to the flames, to expiate the sacrilege of the disciples of Mahomet. The
classic

names of Hierapolis, Apamea, and Emesa, revive for a moment in the list of
con­

quest; the emperor Zimices encamped in the paradise of Damascus, and accepted

the ransom of a submissive people; and the torrent was only stopped by the im­

pregnable fortress of Tripoli, on the sea-coast of Phoenicia. Since the days
of

Heraclius, the Euphrates, below the passage of mount Taurus, had been imper­

vious, and almost invincible, to the Greeks. The river yielded a free passage
to

the victorious Zimisces: and the historian may imitate the speed with which he

overran the once famous cities of Samosata, Edessa, Martyropolis, Amida,(l)
and

Nisibis, the ancient limit of the empire in the neighbourhood of the Tigris.
His

ardour was quickened by the desire of grasping the virgin treasures of Ecbata-

na,(2) a well-known name, under which the Byzantine writer has concealed the

(Wesseling.Ilinerav.p.580.), Yet I cannot credit (his extreme popnlousness a
few years after the testimony of

the emperor Leo, ou yap nuKunKtft* ffrpaToy TOi,- K</.*$* Sjtp^itmt; ic-Ttv.
(Taclica, c. 18. in Meursii Op. torn, r'u

p. 817.)

(1) The tent of Leo the deacon, in the corrupt names of Emeta and Myctarsim,
reveals the cities of Amidst

and Martyropolis. (Miafarekin. See Ahulfeda,Geoe;raph. p. 24J. vers. Reuke.)
Of the former, Leo observes

urbs munita et illostris; of the latter,Clara atque conspicua opibusque et
pecore, reliquis ejus provinciU urbt-

bus atque oppidis lonfje pra>stans.

(2) Ut et Ecbatana nergeret Agarenorumque rejjiara everteret aiunt enim urbium
qua; uranism sunt

ac toto orbe exi.tivu tilicissimam esse auroque ditissimam. (Leo Diacon. apud
Pagium, torn. iv. p. 3*0 This

splendid description suits only wiih Bagdad, and cannot possibly apply either
to Hamadan, the true Ecbatana,

(d Anyille, Geop;. Ancienne, torn. n. p. 237.)or Tauris, which has commonly
been mistaken for that city. The

name ot Ecbaiana, in the same indefinite sense, is transferred by a more
classic authority (Cicero pro Lesre

Mauiha, c.4.) tothe rovalseatof Miihridatei,kinr;ofPontus.

