344 THE DECLINE AND FALL

religion. The twelfth and last of the Imams, conspicuous by the title of
Mahadir

or the Guide, surpassed the solitude and sanctity of his predecessors. He con­

cealed himself in a cavern near Bagdad: the time and place of his death are
un­

known; and his votaries pretend that he still lives, and will appear before
the day

of judgment to overthrow the tyranny of Deial, or the antichrist. (1) In the
lapse

of two or three centuries, the posterity of Abbas, the uncle of Mahomet, had

multiplied to the number of thirty-three thousand ;(2) the race of Ali, might
be

equally prolific: the meanest individual was above the first and greatest of
princes;

and the most eminent were supposed to excel the perfection of angels. But
their

adverse fortune, and the wide extent of the Mussulman empire, allowed an ample

scope for every bold and artful impostor, who claimed affinity with the holy
seed;

the sceptre of the Almohades in Spain and Africa, of the Fatimites in Egypt
and

Syria,(3) of the sultans of Yemen, and of the sophis of Persia,(4) has been
con­

secrated by this vague and ambiguous title. Under their reigns it might be
dan-

to dispute the legitimacy of their birth; and one of the Fatimite caliphs si-

an indiscreet question, by drawing his scimitar. " This" said Moez, "is

my pedigree; and these," casting a handful of gold to his soldiers, " are my
kin­

dred and my children." In the various conditions of princes, or doctors, or
no­

bles, or merchants, or beggars, a swarm of the genuine or fictitious
descendants

of Mahomet and Ali is honoured with the appellation of sheiks, or sherifs,_or

emirs. In the Ottoman empire they are distinguished by a green turban, receive

a stipend from the treasury, are judged only by their chief, and, however
debased

by fortune or character, still assert the proud pre-eminence of their birth. A
fa­

mily of three hundred persons, the pure and orthodox branch of the caliph Has­

san, is preserved without taint or suspicion in the holy cities of Mecca and
Medi­

na, and still retains, after the revolutions of twelve centuries, the custody
of the

temple and the sovereignty of their native land. The fame and merit of Maho­

met would ennoble a plebeian race, and the ancient blood of the Koreish tran­

scends the recent majesty of the kings of the earth. (5)

The talents of Mahomet are entitled to our applause, but his success has
perhaps

too strongly attracted our admiration. Are we surprised that a multitude of
pro­

selytes should embrace the doctrine and the passions of an eloquent fanatic?
In

the heresies of the church, the same seduction has been tried and repeated
from

the time of the apostles to that of the reformers. Does it seem incredible
that a

private citizen should grasp the sword and the sceptre, subdue his native
country,

and erect a monarchy by his victorious arms? In the moving picture of the dy­

nasties of the east, a hundred fortunate usurpers have arisen from a baser
origin,

surmounted more formidable obstacles; and filled a larger scope of empire and
con­

quest Mahomet was alike instructed to preach and to fight, and the union of
these

opposite qualities, while it enhanced his merit, contributed to his success:
the ope­

ration of force and persuasion, of enthusiasm and fear, continually acted on
each

other, till every barrier yielded to their irresistible power. His voice
invited the

Arabs to freedom and victory, to arms and rapine, to the indulgence of their
dar­

ling passions in this world and the other; the restraints which he imposed
were re­

quisite to establish the credit of the prophet, and to exercise the obedience
of the

people; and the only objection to his success, was his rational creed of the
unity

and perfections of God. It is not the propagation but the permanency of his
re­

ligion that deserves- our wonder: the same pure and perfect impression which
he

engraved at Mecca and Medina, is preserved, after the revolutions of twelve
cen­

turies, by the Indian, the African, and the Turkish proselytes of the Koran.
If

(1) The name of Antichrist may seem ridiculous, but the Mahometans have
liberally borrowed the fables of

every religion. (Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 80.82.) In the royal stable
of Ispahan, two horses were al­

ways kept saddled, one for the Mnhadi himself, the other for his lieutenant,
Jesus the son of Mary.

(2) In the year of the Hegira 200. (A. n.815.) See d'Herbelot. p. 546.

(3) D'Herbelot, p. 342. Theenemies of the Fatimites disgraced them bya Jewish
origin. Yet they accnrately

deduced their genealogy from Jaalhr, the sixth Imam: and the impartial
Ahulfeda allows (Anna). Moslem, p.

230.) that they were owned by many, qui absque controTersia genuini sunt
Alidarum, homine propaginum suae

gentis exacte callcntes. He quotes some lines from the celebrated Slterifor
Radi<— Ejrone humilitatem indoam

in terris hostium? (I suspect him to be an Edrissite of Sicily) cum in .Egypto
sit Chalifa de gente Alii, qnocum

ego communem habeo patrem et vindicem.

(4) The kings of Persia of the last dynasty are descended from Sheik Sefi. a
saint of the fourteenth century,

and through him from Moussa Cassem, the son of Hosein, the son of Ali.
(Olearius, p. 957. Chardin, torn. ii'i.

p. 288.) But I cannot trace the intermediate degrees in any genuine or
fabulous pedigree. If they were truly

Fatimites, they might draw their origin from the princes of Mazanderan, who
reigned in the ninth century,

(d'Herbelot, p. 96.)

(?) The present state of the familyof Mahomet and Ali is most accnrately
described by Demetrius Cantemir,

(Hist, of the Othman Empire, p. 94.) and Niebubr. (Description de l'Arabie, p.
9—16. 317, 8tc.) It is much to

ne lamented, that the Danish traveller was unable to purchase the chronicles
of Arabia.

