OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 63

tiie Goths abandoned the siege of Rimini, their tents, their standards, and
their

leaders; and Vitiges, who gave or followed the example of flight, never halted
till

he found a shelter within the walls and morasses of Ravenna.

To these walls, and to some fortresses destitute of any mutual support, the
Go­

thic monarchy was now reduced. The provinces of Italy had embraced the party

of the emperor; and his army, gradually recruited to the number of twenty
thou­

sand men, must have achieved an easy and rapid conquest, if their invincible

powers had not been weakened by the discord of the Roman chiefs. Before the

end of the siege, an act of blood, ambiguous and indiscreet, sullied the fair
fame of

Belisarius. Presidius, a loyal Italian, as he fled from Ravenna to Rome, was
rude­

ly stopped by Constantine, the military governor of Spoleto, and despoiled,
even

in a church, of two daggers richly inlaid with gold and precious stones. As
soon

as the public danger had subsided, Presidius complained of the loss and
injury: his

complaint was heard, but the order of restitution was disobeyed by the pride
and

avarice of the offender. Exasperated by the delay, Presidius boldly arrested
the

general's horse as he passed through the forum; and, with the spirit of a
citizen,

demanded the common benefit of the Roman laws. The honour of Belisarius was

engaged; he summoned a council; claimed the obedience of his subordinate
officer;

and was provoked, by an insolent reply, to call hastily for the presence of
his

guards. Constantine, viewing their entrance as the signal of death, drew his

sword, and rushed on the general, who nimbly eluded the stroke, and was
protect­

ed by his friends; while the desperate assassin was disarmed, dragged into a
neigh­

bouring chamber, and executed, or rather murdered, by the guards, at the arbi­

trary command of Belisarius. (1) In this hasty act of violence, the guilt of
Con­

stantine was no longer remembered; the despair and death of that valiant
officer

were secretly imputed to the revenge of Antonina; and each of his colleagues,
con­

scious of the same rapine, was apprehensive of the same fate. The fear of a
com­

mon enemy suspended the effects of their envy and discontent: but in the
confidence

of approaching victory, they instigated a powerful rival to oppose the
conqueror

•of Rome and Africa. From the domestic service of the palace, and the adminis­

tration of the private revenue, Narses the eunuch was suddenly exalted to the

head of an army; and the spirit of a hero, who afterwards equalled the merit
and

•glory of Belisarius, served only to perplex the operations of the Gothic war.
To

his prudent counsels, the relief of Rimini was ascribed by the leaders of the
dis­

contented faction, who exhorted Narses to assume an independent and separate

command. The epistle of Justinian had indeed enjoined his obedience to the
gene­

ral; but the dangerous exception, as far as may be advantageous to the fiublic
ser­

vice, reserved some freedom of judgment to the discreet favourite, who had so
late­

ly departed from the sacred and familiar conversation of his sovereign. In the

exercise of this doubtful right, the eunuch perpetually dissented from the
opinions

of Belisarius; and, after yielding with reluctance to the siege of Urbino, he
desert­

ed his colleague in the night, and marched away to the conquest of the
JEmilian

province. The fierce and formidable bands of the Heruli were attached to the

person of Narses;(2) ten thousand Romans and confederates were persuaded to

march under his banners; every malecontent embraced the fair opportunity of
re*

vengine; his private or imaginary wrongs; and the remaining troops of
Belisarius

were divided and dispersed from the garrisons of Sicily to the shores of the
Hadri-

atic. His skill and perseverance overcame every obstacle: Urbino was taken,
the

sieges of Fassulac, Orvieto, and Auximum, were undertaken and vigorously
prose­

cuted; and the eunuch Narses was at length recalled to the domestic cares of
the

palace. All dissensions were healed, and all opposition was subdued, by the
tem­

perate authority of the Roman general, to whom his enemies could not refuse
their

esteem; and Belisarius inculcated the salutary lessons, that the forces of the
state

should compose one body, and be animated by one soul. But, in the interval of

discord, the Goths were permitted to breathe; an important season was lost,
Milan

was destroyed, and the northern provinces of Italy were afflicted by an
inundation

of the Franks.

(1) The transaction is related in the public history (Goth. lib. ii. c. 8.)
with candour or caution; in the An­

ecdotes (c. 7.,) with malevolence or freedom: but Marcellinus, or rather his
oontinuator (in Chron.,) casts a

Hhade of premeditated assassination over the death of Constantine. He had
performed good service at Rome

and Spoleto (Procop. Goth. lib. i. c. 7.14.;) but Alemaous confounds him with
a Constantianus comes sta-

balu

(2) They refused to serve after his departure: sold their captives and cattle
to the Goths; and swore never

to fight against them. Frooopius introduces a curious digression on the
manners and adventures of this wan*

«leringnatton,ft part of whom finally emigrated to Tbule or Scandinavia (Goth,
lib. ii. c. 14,15.7

