iU THE DECLINE AND FALL

short epistle to his legitimate or testamentary heir; who fulfilled with
honour, or ne­

glected with impunity, this last request, which the judges before the age of
Augus­

tus were not authorized to enforce. A codicil might be expressed in any mode,

or in any language; but the subscription of five witnesses must declare that
it was

the genuine composition of the author. His intention, however laudable, was
some­

times illegal; and the invention of fidei-commUsa, or trusts, arose from the
struggle

between natural justice and positive jurisprudence. A stranger of Greece or
Africa

might be the friend or benefactor of a childless Roman, but none, except
afellow-citi-

zen, could act as his heir. The Voconian law, which abolished female
succession, re­

strained the legacy or inheritance of a woman to the sum of one hundred
thousand

sesterces;(l) and an only daughter was condemned almost as an alien in her fa­

ther's house. The zeal of friendship, and parental affection, suggested a
liberal

artifice: a qualified citizen was named in the testament, with a prayer or
injunction

that he would restore the inheritance to the person for whom it was truly
intend­

ed. Various was the conduct of the trustees in this painful situation: they
had

sworn to observe the laws of their country, but honour prompted them to
violate

their oath; and if they preferred their interest under the mask of patriotism,
they

forfeited the esteem of every virtuous mind. The declaration of Augustus
relieved

their doubts, gave a legal sanction to confidential testaments and codicils,
and gen­

tly unravelled the forms and restraints of the republican jurisprudence. (2)
But as

the newpractice of trusts degenerated into some abuse, the trustee was
enabled,

by the Trebellian and Pegasian decrees, to reserve one-fourth of the estate,
or to

transfer on the head of the real heir all the debts and actions of the
succession.

The interpretation of testaments was strict and literal; but the language of
trusts

and codicils was delivered from the minute and technical accuracy of the civi­

lians. (3)

III. The general duties of mankind are imposed by their public and private re­

lations: but their specific obligations to each other can only be the effect
of, 1. a

promise, 2. a benefit, or, 3. an injury: and when these obligations are
ratified by

law, the interested party may compel the performance by a judicial action. On

this principle the civilians of every country have erected a similar
jurisprudence,

the fair conclusion of universal reason and justice. (4)

1. The goddess of faith (of human and social faith) was worshipped, not only
in

her temples, but in the lives of the Romans; and if that nation was deficient
in the

more amiable qualities of benevolence and generosity, they astonished the
Greeks

by their sincere and simple performance of the most burdensome engagements.
(5)

Yet among the same people, according to the rigicl maxims of the patricians
and

decemvirs, a naked fiact, a promise, or even an oath, did not create any civil
obli­

gation, unless it was confirmed by the legal form of a stimulation. Whatever
might

be the etymology of the Latin word, it conveyed the idea of a firm and
irrevocable

contract, which was always expressed in the mode of a question and answer. Do

you promise to pay me one hundred pieces of gold?—was the solemn interrogation

of Seius. I do promise—was the reply of Sempronius. The friends of Semproni-

us, who answered for his ability and inclination, might be separately sued at
the

option of Seius: and the benefit of partition, or order of reciprocal actions,
insensi­

bly deviated from the strict theory of stipulation. The most cautious and
delibe­

rate consent was justly required to sustain the validity of a gratuitous
promise; and

the citizen who might have obtained a legal security, incurred the suspicion
of

fraud, and paid the forfeit of his neglect. But the ingenuity of the civilians
suc­

cessfully laboured to convert simple engagements into the form of solemn
stipula­

tions. The pretors, as the guardians of social faith, admitted every rational
evi­

dence of a voluntary and deliberate act, which in their tribunal produced an
equi­

table obligation, and for which they gave an action and a remedy. (6)

(1) Dion Castiut (torn. ii. Ivi. p. su. with Reiraar's Notes) specifies in
Greek money the sum of twenty-fire

thousand drachms.

(2) The revolutions of the Roman laws of inheritance are finely though
sometimes fancifully, deduced by

Montesquieu. (Esprit des Loix, lib. 270

(3) Of the civil jurisprudence of successions, testaments, codicils, legacies,
and trusts, the principles are as­

certained in the Institutes of Caius, (lib. ii. tit. 2—9. p. 91—144.)
Justinian,(lib. ii. tit. 10—25,)and Tbeophilus,

(p. 328—514,) and the immense detail occupies twelve books (28—39.) of the
Pandects.

(4) The Institutes of Caiui.lib. ii. tit. 9,10. p. 144—214.) of Justinian,
(lib. iii. tit. 14—30. lib. iv. tit. 1—6.) and

of Theophilus, (p. 016—837.) distinguish four sorts of obligations—aut re, aut
verbis, aut literis, aut consensu!

but I confess myself partial to my own division,

(5) How much is the cool, rational evidence of Polybius (lib. vi. p. 693, lib.
ini. p. 14S9, 1460.) superior to

vafue,indiscriminate applause—omnium max'uaeet praecipue fldem coluil. (A.
Gellius,20,1.)

(•) The Jus Praitorium de Pactis et Transacttonihus is a separate and
satisfactory treatise of Gerard Noodt.

(Opp. torn. i. p. «3—564.0 And I will here observe that the universities of
Holland and Brandenburgli, in the

