166 THE DECLINE AND FALL

i

Italians beheld with astonishment a foreign race of oxen or buffalqes. (1) The
de­

population of Lombardy, and the increase of forests, affordedtan ample range
for"

the pleasures of the chase. (2) That marvellous art which teaches the birds of

the air to acknowledge the voice, and execute the commands, of their master,

had been unknown to the ingenuity of the Greeks and Romans.(3) Scandinavia

and Scythia produce the boldest and most tractable falcons;(4) they were tamed

and educated by the roving inhabitants, always on horseback and in the field.

This favourite amusement of our ancestors was introduced by the barbarians
into

the Roman provinces; and the laws of Italy esteem the sword and the hawk as of

equal dignity and importance in the hand of a noble Lombard. (5)

So rapid was the influence of climate and example, that the Lombards of the

fourth generation surveyed with curiosity and affright the portraits of their
savage

forefathers. (6) Their heads were shaven behind, but the shaggy locks hung
over

their eyes and mouth, and a long beard, represented the name and character of

the nation. Their dress consisted of loose linen garments, after the fashion
of the

Anglo-Saxons, which were decorated, in their opinion, with broad stripes of
va­

riegated colours. The legs and feet were clothed in long hose, and open
sandals;

and even in the security of peace a trusty sword was constantly girt to their
side.

Yet this strange apparel, and horrid aspect, often concealed a gentle and
generous

disposition; and as soon as the rage of battle had subsided, the captives and
sub­

jects were sometimes surprised by the humanity of the victor. The vices of the

Lombards were the effect of passion, of ignorance, of intoxication; their
virtues

are the more laudable, as they were not affected by the hypocrisy of social
manners,

nor imposed by the rigid constraint of laws and education. I should not be ap­

prehensive of deviating from my subject, if it were in my power to delineate
the

private life of the conquerors of Italy: and I shall relate with pleasure the
adven­

turous gallantry of Autharis, which breathes the true spirit of chivalry and
ro­

mance. (7) After the loss of his promised bride, a Merovingian princess, he
sought

in marriage the daughter of the king of Bavaria; and the Garibald accepted the

alliance of the Italian monarch. Impatient of the slow progress of
negotiation,

the ardent lover escaped from his palace, and visited the court of Bavaria in
the

train of his own embassy. At the public audience, the unknown stranger ad­

vanced to the throne, and informed Garibald, that the ambassador was indeed
the

minister of state, but that he alone was the friend of Autharis, who had
trusted

him with the delicate commission of making a faithful report of the charms of
his

spouse. Theudelinda was summoned to undergo this important examination; and

after a pause of silent rapture, he hailed her as queen of Italy, and humbly
re­

quested, that, according to the custom of the nation, she would present a cup
of

wine to the first of her new subjects. By the command of her father, she
obeyed;

325.) Gisulf obtained from liis uncle gencrosarnm cquarum grebes. Paul,lib.
ii. c. 9. The Lombards after­

ward introduced caballi eylvatici—wild horses. Paul, lib. iv. c. 11.

(1) Tunc. (A. D. 596.) primum bubali in Italiam delati Italiae populis
miracula tuere (Paul Warnefrid, lib.

iv. c. 11.) The buffalof s, whose native climate appears to be Africa and
India, are nnknown to Europe, ex­

cept in Italy, where they are numerous and useful. The ancients were ignorant
of these animals, unless

Aristotle (Hist. Animal, lib. ii. c. i. p. 58. Paris, 1783.) has described
them as the wild oxen of Arachosia. See

Buffon, Hist. Naturelle, torn. xi. and supplement, torn. 6; Hist. Generale des
Voyages, torn. i. p. 7. 481: ii. 105;

iii. 291; iv. 234.461; v. 193; vi. 491; viii. 400; x. 666: Pennant's
Quadrupeds, p. 24; Dictionaire d'Hist. Natu-

relle, par Valmont de Uomare, torn. ii. p. 74. Vet I must not conceal the
suspicion that Paul, by a vulgar er­

ror, may have applied the name of bubatus to the aurochs, or wild bull, of
ancient Germany.

(2) Consult the twenty-first Dissertation ofMuratori.

(3) Their ignorance is proved by the silence even of those who professedly
treat of the arts of hunting and

the history of animals. Aristotle (Hist. Animal, lib. ix. c. 56. torn. i. p.
586. and the notes of his last editor, M.

Camus, torn. ii. p. 314.,) Pliny (Hist. Natur. lib. x. c. 10.) .Elian, (de
Natur. Animal, lib. ii. c. 42.,) and perhaps

Homer (Odyss. xxii. 302—306.) describes with astonishment a tacit league and
common chase between the

hawks and the Thracian fowiers.

(4) Particularly the gerfaut or gyrfalcon, of the size of a small eagle. See
the animated description of M.

tie Buffon, Hist. Katnrelle, torn. xvi. p. 239, &c,

(5) Script. Rerum. Italicarum, torn. i. part 2. p. 129. This is the sixteenth
law of the emperor Lewis the

Pious. His father Charlemagne had falconers in his household as well as
huntsmen; (Memoires snr I'Ancienne

Chevalerie, par M. de St. Pelaye, torn. iii. p. 175.) I observe in the laws of
Rotharis a more early mention of

the art of hawking (No. 322.) and in Gaul, in the fifth century, it is
celebrated by Sidonius Apollinaris amonr

the talents of Avitus (202—207,) .Sw*

(6) The epitaph of Droctulf (Paul, lib. iii. c. 19.) may BsSlrplicd to ninny
of his countrymen:

Terribilis visu facies, sed corda benignus

Longaque robusto pectore barba fuit.

The portraits of the old Lombards might still be seen in the palace of Monza,
twelve miles from Milan

which had been founded or restored by queen Theudelinda (lib. iv. 22, 23. See
Muratori, torn. i. dissertaz.*

13. p. 360.

(7) The story of Autharis and Theudelinda is related by Paul, lib. iii. c. 29.
34. and any fragment of Bava­

rian antiquity excites the indefatigable diligence of the count de Buat. Hist,
ties Pennies de 1'Eurone, torn, xi

p. 595—635, torn. xii. p. 1—53. ' '

