OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

The epistle of Belisarius to the emperor announced his victory, his danger,
and

his resolution. " According to your commands, we have entered the dominions of

the Goths, and reduced to your obedience, Sicily, Campania, and the city of
Rome:

but the loss of these conquests will be more disgraceful than their
acquisition was

glorious. Hitherto we have successfully fought against the multitude of the
bar­

barians, but the multitudes may finally prevail. Victory is the gift of
Providence, •

but the reputation of kings and generals depends on the success or the failure
of

their designs. Permit me to speak with freedom; if you wish that we should
live,

send us subsistence; if you desire that we should conquer, send us arms,
horses,

and men. The Romans have received us as friends and deliverers; but in our
pre­

sent distress, they will be either betrayed by their confidence, or we shall
be op­

pressed by their treachery and hatred. For myself, my life is consecrated to
your

service; it is yours to reflect, whether my death in this situation will
contribute to

the glory and prosperity of your reign." Perhaps that reign would have been

equally prosperous,- if the peaceful master of the east had abstained from the
con­

quest of Africa and Italy; but as Justinian was ambitious of fame, he made
some

efforts, they were feeble and languid, to support and rescue his victorious
general.

A re-enforcement of sixteen hundred Sclavonians and Huns was led by Martin and

Valerian; and as they had reposed during the winter season in the harbours of

Greece, the strength of the men and horses was not impaired by the fatigues of
a

sea-voyage; and they distinguished their valour in the first sally against the
besie­

gers. About the time of the summer solstice, Euthalius landed at Terracina
with

large sums of money for the payment of the troops; he cautiously proceeded
along

the^Appian way, and this convoy entered Rome through the gateCapena,(l) while

Belisarius, on the other side; diverted the attention of the Goths by a
vigorous and

successful skirmish. These seasonable aids, the use and reputation of which
were

dexterously managed by the Roman general, revived the courage, or at least the

hopes, of the soldiers and people. The historian Procopius was despatched with

an important commission to collect the troops and provisions which Campania

could furnish, or Constantinople had sent; and the secretary of Belisarius was
soon

followed by Antonina herself, (2) who boldly traversed the posts of the enemy,
and

returned with the oriental succours to the relief of her husband and the
besieged

city. A fleet of three thousand Isaurians cast anchor in the bay of Naples,
and

afterward at Ostia. Above two thousand horse, of whom a part were Thracians,

landed at Tarentum; and, after the junction of five hundred soldiers of
Campania,

and a train of wagons laden with wine and flour, they directed their march on
the

Appian way, from Capua to the neighbourhood of Rome. The forces that ar­

rived by land and sea were united at the mouth of the Tiber. Antonina convened
a

council of war: it was resolved to surmount, with sails and oars, the adverse
stream

of the river: and the Goths were apprehensive of disturbing, by any rash
hostili­

ties, the negotiation to which Belisarius had craftily listened. They
credulously

believed, that they saw no more than the vanguard of a fleet and army, which
al­

ready covered the Ionian sea and the plains of Campania; and the illusion was

supported by the haughty language of the Roman general, when he gave audience

to the ambassadors of Vitiges. After a specious discourse to vindicate the
justice

of his cause, they declared that, for the sake of peace, they were disposed to
re­

nounce the possession of Sicily. " The emperor is not less generous, replied
his.

lieutenant with a disdainful smile: " in return for a gift which you no longer
pos­

sess, he presents you with an ancient province of the empire—he resigns to
the'

Goths the sovereignty of the British island." Belisarius rejected with equal
firm­

ness and contempt the offer of a tribute; but he allowed the Gothic
ambassadors to

seek their fate from the mouth of Justinian himself; and consented, with
seeming

reluctance, to a truce of three months, from the winter solstice to the
equinox of

spring. Prudence might not safely trust either the oaths or hostages of the
bar­

barians, but the conscious superiority of the Roman chief was expressed in the

distribution of his troops. As soon as fear or hunger compelled the Goths to
eva­

cuate Alba, Porto, and Centumcella:, their place was instantly supplied; the
gar-

risons*of Narni, Spoleto, and Perusia, were re-enforced, and the seven camps
of

the besiegers were gradually encompassed with the calamities of a siege. The

(1) The old Capena was removed by Aurelian to, or near, the modern gate of St.
Sebastian (see Nolli's plan.)

That memorable spot hat been consecrated by the Egerian grove, the memory of
Numa, triumphal arches, the

sepulchres of the Scipios, Metelli, &c.

(S) The expression of Proeopius has an invidious cait—tvxw u tcj ser^ou; rw
c$nri trvp£nT:nc.vw tty.ftZmi-j

(Goth. lib. U. c, 40 Yet he is speaking of a woraan.

