THE DECLINE AND FALL

'* To the king, or, as he styles himself, the emperor>of the Franks and Lom­

bards." When both power and virtue were extinct, they despoiled Lewis II. op

his hereditary title, and, with the barbarous appellation of rex or rega,
degraded

him among the crowd of Latin princes. His reply(l) is expressive of his weak­

ness: he proves, with some learning, that both in sacred and profane history,
the

name of king is synonymous with the Greek word basileus: if, at
Constantinople,

it were assumed in a more exclusive and imperial sense, he claims from his
ances­

tors, and from the pope, a just participation of the honours of the Roman
purple.

The same controversy was revived in the reign of the Othos; and their ambassa­

dor describes, in lively colours, the insolence of the Byzantine court. (2)
The

Greeks affected to despise the poverty and ignorance of the Franks and Saxons;

and in their last decline refused to prostitute to the kings of Germany the
title of

Roman emperors.

These emperors, in the election of the popes, continued to exercise the powers

. which had been assumed by the Gothic and Grecian princes; and the importance

of this prerogative increased with the temporal estate and spiritual
jurisdiction of

the Roman church. In the Christian aristocracy, the principal members of the

clergy still formed a senate to assist the administration, and to supply the
vacancy,

of the bishop. Rome was divided into twenty-eight parishes, and each parish
was

governed by a cardinal priest or presbyter, a title which, however common and

modest in its origin, has aspired to emulate the purple of kings. Their number

was enlarged by the association of the seven deacons of the most considerable
hos­

pitals, the seven palatine judges of the Lateran, and some dignitaries of the

church. The ecclesiastical senate was directed by the seven cardinal bishops
of

the Roman province, who were less occupied in the superb diocesses of Ostia,

Porto, Velitrse, Tusculum#Prxneste, Tibur, and the Sabines, than by their
weekly

service in the Lateran, and their superior share in the honours and authority
of

the apostolic see. On the death of the pope, these bishops recommended a suc­

cessor to the suffrage of the college of cardinals, (3) and their choice was
ratified or

rejected by the applause or clamour of the Roman people. But the election was

imperfect; nor could the pontiff be legally consecrated till the emperor, the
advo­

cate of the church, had graciously signified his approbation and consent. The

royal commissioner examined, on the spot, the form and freedom of the proceed­

ings: nor was it, till after a previous scrutiny into the qualifications of
the candi­

dates, that he accepted an oath of fidelity, and confirmed the donations which
had

successively enriched the patrimony of St. Peter. In the frequent schisms, the

rival claims were submitted to the sentence of the emperor, and in a synod of
bi­

shops he presumed to judge, to condemn, and to punish, the crimes of a guilty

pontiff-. Otho I. imposed a treaty on the senate and people, who engaged to
pre­

fer the candidate most acceptable to his majesty;(4) his successors
anticipated or

prevented their choice: they bestowed the Roman benefice, like the bishoprics
of

Cologne or Bamberg, on their chancellors or preceptors: and whatever might be
the

merit of a Frank or Saxon, his name sufficiently attests the interposition of
foreign

power. These- acts of prerogative were most speciously excused by the vices of

a popular election. The competitor who had been excluded by the cardinals ap­

pealed to the passions or avarice of the multitude: the Vatican and the
Lateran

were stained with blood; and the most powerful senators, the marquises of
Tusca­

ny and the counts of Tusculum, held the apostolic see in a long and
disgraceful

servitude. The Roman pontiffs, of the ninth and tenth centuries, were
insulted,

imprisoned, and murdered, by their tyrants; and such was their indigence after

0) See the epistle in Paralipomena, of the anonymous writer of Salerno,
(Script. Ital. torn. ii. pars ii. p.

9,43—254. c. 93—107.) whom Baroniua (A. D. 871. no. 51—71.) mistook for
Erchempert, when he transcribe*it

in his Annals.

(2) Ipse enim vol, non imperatorem id ist Bswt'Xem sua lingua, seel ob
mdignationem Psy*, in est regein

nostra vocabat. Liutprand, in Legal, in Script. Ital. torn. ii. pars i. p.
479.) The pope had exhorted Nice-

phorus, emperor of the Greeks to make peace with Otho, the august emperor of
the Romans^-qua; inscriptio

secundum Graces peccatria et terneraria . . . imperatorem inquiunt,
universalem, Romanorum, Auguttum,

magnum, solum, Niccphorum. (p. 486.)

(3) The origin and progress of the title of cardinal may be found in
Thomassin; (Discipline d'Eglise, tow.

i. p. 1261—1298.) Muratori, (Antiquitat. Italia; Medii iEvi, torn. vi.
dissert. lxi. p. 159—182.) and Mosheim, (In-

stitut. Hist. Eccles. p. 345—347.) who accurately remarks the forms and
changes of the election. The cardi­

nal bishops, so highly exalted by Peter Damianus, are sunk to a level with the
rest of the sacred college.

(4) Firmiter jurantes, nunnuam se papam electuros aut ordinaturos, prseter
consensum et electionem Otho-

nis et filli sui. (Liutprand, lib. vi. c. 6. p. 476.) This important
concession may either supply or confirm tire

decree of the clergy and people of Rome, so fiercely rejected byBaronius,
Pagi,and Muratori, (A D. 904.) and

so well defended and explained by St. Marc. (Abtege, torn, ii. p. 808—816.
tom.1T, p. 1167—H85.) Consult that

blitorical critic, and the Annals of Muratori, for the election and
confirmation of each pope.

