THE DECLINE 'AND FALL

ty thousand Romans and strangers; and some months were successfully employed

in the recovery of the cities of Syria, Mesopotamia, and Armenia, whose
fortifi­

cations had been imperfectly restored. Sarbar still maintained the important
sta­

tion of Chalcedon; but the jealousy of Chosroes, or the artifice of Heraclius,
soon

alienated the mind of that powerful satrap from the service of his king and
coun­

try. A messenger was intercepted with a real or fictitious mandate to the
cadari-

gan, or second in command, directing him to sendj without delay, to the
throne,

Hie head of a guilty or unfortunate general. The despatches were transmitted
to

Sarbar himself; and as soon as he read the sentence of his own death, he
dexte­

rously inserted the names of four hundred officers, assembled a military
council,

and asked the cadarigan, whether he was prepared to execute the commands of

their tyrant? The Persians unanimously declared, that Chosroes had forfeited

the sceptre; a separate treaty was concluded with the government of Constanti­

nople; and if some considerations of honour or policy restrained Sarbar from
join­

ing the standard of Heraclius, the emperor was assured, that he might
prosecute,

without interruption, his designs of victory and peace.

Deprived of his firmest support, and doubtful of the fidelity of his subjects,
the

greatness of Chosroes was still conspicuous in its ruins. The number of five
hun­

dred thousand may be interpreted as an oriental metaphor, to describe the men

and arms, the horses and elephants, that covered Media and Assyria against the

invasion of Heraclius. Yet the Romans boldly advanced from the Araxes to the

Tigris, and the timid prudence of Rhazates was content to follow them by
forced

marches through a desolate country till he received a peremptory mandate to

risk the fate of Persia in a decisive battle. Eastward of the Tigris, at the
end of

the bridge of Mosal, the great Nineveh had formerly been erected:(l) the city,

and even the ruins of the city, had long since disappeared :(2) the vacant
space

afforded a spacious field for the operations of the two armies. But these
opera­

tions are neglected by the Byzantine historians, and, like the authors of epic
poe­

try and romance, they ascribe the victory, not to the military conduct, but to

the personal valour, of their favourite hero. On this memorable day, Hera­

clius, on his horse Phallus, surpassed the bravest of his warriors: his lip
was

pierced with a spear, the steed was wounded in the thigh, but he carried his

master safe and victorious through the triple phalanx of the barbarians. In
the

heat of the action, three valiant chiefs were successively slain by the sword
and

lance of the emperor; among these was Rhazates himself; he fell like a
soldier,

but the sight of his head scattered grief and despair through the fainting
ranks of

the Persians. His armour of pure and massy gold, the shield of one hundred and

twenty plates, the sword and belt, the saddle and cuirass, adorned the triumph
of

Heraclius, and if he had not been faithful to Christ and his mother, the
champion

of Rome might have offered the fourth ofiime spoils to the Jupiter of the
capitoL(3)

In the battle of Nineveh, which was fiercely fought from day-break to the ele­

venth hour, twenty-eight standards, besides those which might be broken or
torn,

were taken from the Persians; the greatest part of their army was cut in
pieces,

and the victors, concealing their'own loss, passed the night on the field.
They

acknowledged, that on this occasion it was less difficult to kill than to
discomfit

the soldiers of Chosroes; amidst the bodies of their friends, no more than two
bow­

shot from the enemy, the remnant of the Persian cavalry stood firm till the
seventh

hour of the night; about the eighth hour they retired to their unrifled camp,
col­

lected their baggage, and dispersed on all sides, from the.want of orders
rather

than of resolution. The diligence of Heraclius was not less admirable in the
use

of victory; by a march of forty-eight miles in four-and-twenty hours, his
vanguard

occupied the bridges of the greater and the lesser Zab; and the cities and
palaces

(1) Ctesiasfapud Diodox. Sictil.tom. i. lib.ii. p. 115. edit. Wesseliug,
assigns four hundred and eighty sta­

dia (perhaps only thirty-two mites) for the circumference of Nineveh. Jonas
talks of three days'journey, the

one Hundred and twenty thousand persons described by the prophet as incapable
of discerning tbeir right

hand from thoii* left, may afford about seven hundred thousand persons of all
ages for the inhabitants of that

ancient capital, (GoEruet,OriffinesdesLoix.&c. torn. iii. part I. p. 02,930
which ceased to exist six hundred

years before Christ. The western suburb still subsisted, and is mentioned
under the name of Mosul in the first

age of the Arabian caliphs. r

(2) Niebuhr (Voyage en Arabie, &c. torn. ii. p. 286.) passed over Nineveh
without perceiving it. He mis­

took for a ridge of hills the old rampart of brick or earth. It is said to
have been one hundred feet high,

flanked with fifteen hundred towers, each of the height of two hundred feet.

(3) Rex regia arma fero (says Romulus, in the first consecration) .... bina
pot tea (continues Livy, 1.10.)

inter tot bella, opima parta sunt spolia. adeonra ejus fortuna decoris. If
Varro(apud Pomp. Featum. p. 306.

edit. Dacier) could justify hit liberality in granting the opimespoils to a
common soldier who had slain the

fctug or general of the enemy, fee honour would hive been much more cheap ami
common.

