OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 11J

repaired and beautified his equestrian statue; since the fall of the empire,
it has

been melted into cannon by the victorious Turks. (1)

I shall conclude this chapter with the comets, the earthquakes, and the
plague,

which astonished or afflicted the age of Justinian.

I. In the fifth year of his reign, and in the month of September, a comet(2)
was

seen during twenty days in the western quarter of the heavens, and which shot
its

rays into the north. Eight years afterwards, while the sun was in Capricorn,
ano­

ther comet appeared to follow in the Sagittary: the size was gradually
increasing;

the head was in the east, the tail in the west, and it remained visible about
forty

days. The nations, who gazed with astonishment, expected wars and calamities

from their baleful influence; and these expectations were abundantly
fulfilled. The

astronomers dissembled their ignorance of the nature of these blazing stars,
which

they affected to represent as the floating meteors of the air; and few among
them

embraced the simple notion of Seneca and the Chaldeans, that they are only
pla­

nets of a longer period and more eccentric motion. (3) Time and science have

justified the conjectures and predictions of the Roman sage: the telescope has

opened new worlds to the eyes of astronomers;(4) and, in the narrow space of
his­

tory and fable, one and the same comet is already found to have revisited the
earth

in seven equal revolutions of five hundred and seventy-five years. The
first,(S)

which ascends beyond the Christian era one thousand seven hundred and sixty-
se­

ven years, is coeval with Ogyges, the father of Grecian antiquity. And this
ap­

pearance explains the tradition which Varro has preserved, that under his
reign

the planet Venus changed her colour, size, figure, and course: a prodigy
without

example either in past or succeeding ages.(6) The second visit, in the year
1193,

is darkly implied in the fable of Electra, the seventh of the Pleiads, who
have been

reduced to six since the time of the Trojan war. That nymph, the wife of Dar-

danus, was unable to support the ruin of'her country; she abandoned the dances

of her sister orbs, fled from the zodiac to the north pole, and obtained, from
her

dishevelled locks, the name of the comet. The third period expires in the year
618,

a date that exactly agrees with the tremendous comet of the Sibyl, and perhaps

of Pliny, which arose in the west, two generations before the reign of Cyrus.
The

fourth apparition, forty-four years before the birth of Christ, is of all
others the most

splendid and important. After the death of Caesar, a long-haired star was
conspi­

cuous to Rome and to the nations, during the games which were exhibited by
young

Octavian, in honour of Venus and his uncle. The vulgar opinion, that it
conveyed

to heaven the divine soul of the dictator, was cherished and consecrated by
the piety

of a statesman: while his secret superstition referred the comet to the glory
of his

own times. (7) Thefifth visit has already been ascribed to the fifth year of
Justinian,

which coincides with the five hundred and thirty-first of the Christian era.
And it

may deserve notice, that in this, as in the preceding instance, the comet was
fol­

lowed, though at a longer interval, by a remarkable paleness of the sun. The
sixth

return, in the year 1106, is recorded by the chronicles of Europe and China;
and

in the first fervour of the Crusades, the Christians and the Mahometans might

surmise, with equal reason, that it portended the destruction of the infidels.
The

seventh phenomena of 1680 was presented to the eyes of an enlightened age. (8)

(1) Seein the C.P. Christiana of Ducange,(lib.i. c. 24.No. l.)a chain of
original testimonies, from Proco-

pius in the sixth, to Gyllius in the sixteenth century.

(2) The first comet is mentioned by John Malala, (torn. ii. p. 190,319.) and
Theophanes; (p. 154.) the second

by Procopius. (Persic, lib. ii. c. 4.) Yet I strongly suspect their identity.
The paleness of the sun (Vandal,

lib. ii. c. 14.) is supplied by Theophanes (p. 158.) to a different year.

(3) Seneca's seventh book of Natural Questions displays, in the theory of
comets, a philosophic mind.

Yetshould we not too candidly confound a vague prediction, a veniet
tempus,8cc. with the merit of real dis­

coveries.

(4) Astronomers may study Newton and Halley. I draw my humble science from the
article Comefe, in the

French Encyclopedic by M. d'Alembert.

(5) Wbiston, the honest, pious, visionary Whiston, had fancied for the era of
Noah's flood (two thousand

two hundred and forty-two years before Christ,) a prior apparition of the same
comet which drowned the

earth with its tail.

(6) A dissertation of Freret (Meraoires de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, torn.
x. p. 357—377.) affords a happy

union of philosophy and erudition. The phenomenon in the time of Ogyges was
preserved by Varro, (apuu

Augustin. de Civitate Dei, 21. 8.) who quotes Castor, Dion of Naples, and
Adrastns of Cyzicus—nobiles ma­

thematics The two subsequent periods are preserved by the Greek mythologists
and the spurious books of

Sibylline verses.

(7) Pliny (Hist. Nat. ii. 23.) has transcribed the original memorial of
Augustus. Mairan, in his most inge­

nious letters to the P. Parennin, missionary in China, removes the games and
the comet of September, from the

year 44 to the year 43, before the Christian era; but I am not totally subdued
by the criticism of the Astrono­

mer. (Opusculus, p. 275—351.)

(8) This last comet was visible in the month of December, 1680. Bayle, who
began his Pensees sur le Comete

ia January, 1681, ((Eurres, torn, iii.) was forced to argue that a
supernatural comet would have confirmed the

