OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 27 $

tion of a painter, so profane and odious in the eyes of the primitive
Christians.

The Olympian Jove, created by the muse of Homer and the chisel of Phidias,

might inspire a philosophic mind with momentary devotion; but these catholic

images were faintly and flatly delineated by monkish artists, in the last
degeneracy

of taste and genius. (1)

The worship of images has stolen into the church by insensible degrees, and

each petty step was pleasing to the superstitious mind, as productive of
comfort

and innocent of sin. But in the beginning of the eighth century, in the full
magni­

tude of the abuse, the more timorous Greeks were awakened by an apprehension,

that, under the mask of Christianity, they had restored the religion of their
fa­

thers: they heard, with grief and impatience, the name of idolaters; the
incessant

charge of the Jews and Mahometans,(2) who derived from the law and the Koran

an immortal hatred to graven images and all the relative worship. The
servitude

of the Jews might curb their zeal and depreciate their authority; but the
trium­

phant Mussulmans, who reigned at Damascus, and threatened Constantinople, cast

into the scale of reproach the accumulated weight of truth and victory. The
cities

of Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, had been fortified by the images of Christ,
his

mother, and his saints; and each city presumed on the hope or promise of
miracu­

lous defence. In a rapid conquest often years, the Arabs subdued those cities
and

these images; and, in their opinion, the Lord of Hosts pronounced a decisive
judg­

ment between the adoration and contempt of these mute and inanimate idols. For

awhile Edessa had braved the Persian assaults: but the chosen city, the spouse
of

Christ, was involved in the common ruin; and his divine resemblance became the

slave and trophy of the infidels. After a servitude of three hundred years,
the pal­

ladium was yielded to the devotion of Constantinople, for a ransom of twelve
thou­

sand pounds of silver, the redemption of two hundred Mussulmans, and a
perpetual

truce of the territory of Edessa. (3) In this season of distress and dismay,
the elo­

quence of the monks was exercised in the defence of images; and they
"attempted

to prove, that the sin of schism of the greatest part of the orientals had
forfeited

the favour, and annihilated the virtue, of these precious symbols. But they
were

now opposed by the murmurs of many simple or rational Christians, who appealed

to the evidence of texts, of facts, and of the primitive times, and secretly
desired

the reformation of the church. As the worship of images had never been
establish­

ed by any general or positive law, its progress in the eastern empire had been
re­

tarded, or accelerated, by the differences of men and manners, the local
degrees of

refinement, and the personal characters of the bishops. The splendid devotion
was

fondly cherished bv the levity of the capital, and the inventive genius of the
By­

zantine clergy, while the rude and remote districts of Asia were strangers to
this

innovation of sacred luxury. Many large congregations of Gnostics and Arians

maintained, after their conversion, the simple worship which had preceded
their

separation; and the Armenians, the most warlike subjects of Rome, were not re­

conciled, in the twelfth century, to the sight of images. (4) The various
denomina­

tions of men afforded a fund of prejudices and aversion, of small account in
the

villages of Anatolia or Thrace, but which, in the fortune of a soldier, a
prelate, or

a eunuch, might be often connected with the powers of the church and state.

Of such adventures, the most fortunate was the emperor Leo 111.(5) who, from

the mountains of Isauria, ascended the throne of the east. He was ignorant of
sa-

(1) w Your scandalous figures stand quite out from the canvas: they are as bad
as a croupe of statues." It

was thus that the ignorance and bigotry of a Greek priest applauded the
picture of Titian, which he had or*

dered, and refused to accept.

(2) By Cedrenus, Zonaras, Glycas, and Manasses, ttie origin of the Iconoclasts
is imputed to the caliph Ye-

zid and two Jews, who proniised the empii-e to Leo; and the reproaches of
these hostile, sectaries are turned

into an absurd conspiracy for restoring the purity of the Christian worship.
(See Spanheim, Hist. Imag.

C.2.)

(3) See Elmacin,(Hist. Saracen, p. 267.) Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 201.) and
Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem,

p. 29s.) the Criticisms of Pagi, torn. iii. A. D. 944.) The prudent Franciscan
refused to determine whether

the image of Edessa now reposes at Rome or Genoa; but its repose is
inglorious, and this ancient object of

worship is no longer famous or fashionable.

(4) Appttuc.; xx* Axawxvat,- n *yi»v tiM**v rrpwxui<i|Ti.- xmiyop'.vTxt.
(Xicetas, lib. ii. p. 258.) The Armenian

churches are still content with the cross; (Missions do Levant, torn. tii. p.
148.) but surely the superstitious

Greek is unjust to the superstition of the Germans of the twelfth century.

(5) Our original but not impartial monuments of the Iconoclasts must lie drawn
from the Acts of the Coun­

cil, (mm. viii. and in.) Col leet. Labhe edit. Venet. and the historical
writings of Theophanes, Nicephoms, Ma­

nasses, Cedrenus, Zonaras, Sec, Of the modern catholics, Baroniiis, Pagi,
Natalis Alexander, (Hist. Eccles.

Scenlum 8. and 9.) and Maimbourg,(Hist. des Conoclastes) have treated the
subject with learning, passion,

and credulity. The protestant labours of Frederic Snanlieim (Historia
Imaginarurn Reslituta) and James

Basnage, (Hist, des Eglises Reformees, torn. ii. lib. xsiii. p. 1339—1385.)
are cast into the Iconoclast scale.

"With this mutual aid, and opposite tendency, it is easy for us to poise the
balance with philosophic indif­

ference.

Vol. III. S5

