OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 21

hitants, about thirty thousand males, condensed, within the period of a single
life,

the genius of ages and millions. Our sense of the dignity of human nature is
ex­

alted by the simple recollection, that Isocrates(l) was the companion of Plato
and

Xenophon; that he assisted, perhaps with the historian Thucydides, at the
first

representations of the CEdipus of Sophocles and the Iphigenia of Euripides;
and that

his pupils jEschines and Demosthenes contended for the crown of patriotism in

the presence of Aristotle, the master of Theophrastus, who taught at Athens
with

the founders of the Stoic and Epicurean sects. (2) The ingenious youth of
Attica

enjoyed the benefits of their domestic education, which was communicated
without

envy to the rival cities. Two thousand disciples heard the lessons of
Theophras­

tus;^) the schools of rhetoric must have been still more populous than those
of

philosophy; and a rapid succession of students diffused the fame of their
teachers,

as far as the utmost limits of the Grecian language and name. Those limits
were

enlarged by the victories of Alexander; the arts of Athens survived her
freedom

and dominion; and the Greek colonies, which the Macedonians planted in Egypt,

and scattered over Asia, undertook long and frequent pilgrimages to worship
the

Muses in their favourite temple on the banks of the Ilissus. The Latin
conquerors

respectfully listened to the instructions of their subjects and captives; the
names

of Cicero and Horace were enrolled in the schools of Athens; and, after the
perfect

settlement of the Roman empire, the natives of Italy, of Africa and of
Britain, con­

versed in the groves of the academy with their fellow-students of the east.
The

studies of philosophy and eloquence are congenial to a popular state, which
en­

courages the freedom of inquiry, and submits only to the force of persuasion.
In

the republics of Greece and Rome, the art of speaking was the powerful engine
of

patriotism or ambition; and the schools of rhetoric poured forth a colony of
states­

men and legislators. When the liberty of public debate was suppressed, th«
ora­

tor in the honourable profession of an advocate, might plead the cause of
innocence

and justice; he might abuse his talents in the more profitable trade of
panegyric; and

the same precepts continued to dictate the fanciful declamations of the
sophist, and

the chaster beauties of historical composition. The systems, which professed
to un­

fold the nature of God, of man, and of the universe, entertained the curiosity
of the

philosophic student; and, according to the temper of his mind, he might doubt
with

the sceptics, or decide with the Stoics, sublimely speculate with Plato, or
severe­

ly argue with Aristotle. The pride of the adverse sects had fixed an
unattainable

term of moral happiness and perfection; but the race was glorious and
salutary;

the disciples of Zeno, and even those of Epicurus, were taught both to act and
to

suffer; and the death of Petronius was not less effectual than that of Seneca,
to

humble a tyrant by the discovery of his impotence. The light of science could

not indeed be confined within the walls of Athens. Her incomparable writers

address themselves to the human race; the living masters emigrated to-Italy
and

Asia; Berytus, in later times, was devoted to the study of the law; astronomy
and

physic were cultivated in the museum of Alexandria; but the Attic schools of

rhetoric and philosophy maintained their superior reputation from the
Peloponne-

sian war to the reign of Justinian. Athens, though situated in a barren soil,

possessed a pure air, a free navigation, and the monuments of ancient art.
That

sacred retirement was seldom disturbed by business of trade, or government;
and

the last of the Athenians were distinguished by their lively wit, the purity
of their

taste and language, their social manners, and some traces, at least in
discourse, of

the magnanimity of their fathers. In the suburbs of the city, the academy of
the

Platohists the lyceum of the Peripatetics, the /wrtico of the Stoics and the
garden

of the Epicureans, were planted with trees and decorated with statues: and the

philosophers, instead of being immured in a cloister, delivered their
instructions

in spacious and pleasant walks, which, at different hours, were consecrated to
the

exercises of the mind and body. The genius of the founders still lived in
those

venerable seats; the ambition of succeeding to the masters of human reason,
ex­

cited a generous emulation; and the merit of the candidates was determined,
on.

each vacancy, by the free voices of an enlightened people. The Athenian pro­

fessors were-paid by their disciples: according to their mutual wants and
abilities,

(1) The life of Isocrates extends from Olymp. 86. 1. to 110. 3. (ante Christ.
436—433.) Sec Dionys. Halicarn,

torn. ii. p. 149,150. edit. Hudson; Plutarch (live anonymous)in Vit. X.
Oratorutn, p. 1538—1543, edit, H. Steph.

Phot. Cod. 259. p. 1453.

(8) Theschoolsof Athens are copiously, though concisely, represented in the
Fortuna Attica of Meunius.

(c. viii. p. 52—73. in torn. i. Opp.) For the state and arts of the city, see
the first book of Pausanias, and a small

timet of Diesearchus (in the second volume of Hudson's Geographers,) who wrote
about Olymp. 117. DodweH'c,

Dissertat. sect.

(3) Diogen. Laert. de Vit. Philosoph. L T. iegro. 37. p. 289.

