OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 38.3

. Before Musa would trust an army of the faithful to the traitors and infidels
of a

foreign land, he made a less dangerous trial of their strength and veracity.
One

hundred Arabs, and four hundred Africans, passed over, in four vessels, from

Tangier, or Ceuta; the place of their descent on the opposite shore of the
strait, is

marked by the name of Tarif their chief; and the date of this memorable
event(l)

is fixed to the month of Ramadan, of the ninety-first year of the Hegira, to
the

month of July, seven hundred and forty-eight years from the Spanish era of

Ca;sar,(2) seven hundred and ten after the birth of Christ. From their first
sta­

tion they marched eighteen miles through a hilly country to the castle and
town

of Julian;(3) on which (it is, still called Algezire,) they bestowed the name
of the

Green Island, from a verdant cape that advances into the sea. Their hospitable

entertainment, the Christians who joined their standard, their inroad into a
fertile

and unguarded province, the richness of their spoil, and the safety of their
return,

announced to their brethren the most favourable omens of victory. In the ensu­

ing spring, five thousand veterans and volunteers were embarked under the com­

mand of Tarik, a dauntless and skilful soldier, who surpassed the expectations
of

his chief; and the necessary transports were provided by the industry of their
too

faithful ally. The Saracens landed(4) at the pillar or point of Europe; the
cor­

rupt and familiar appellation of Gibraltar ( Gebel et Tarik,) describes the
moun­

tain of Tarik; and the intrenchments of his camp were tthe first outlines of
those

fortifications, which, in the hands of our countrymen, Tiave resisted the art
and

power of the house of Bourbon. The adjacent governors informed the court of

Toledo of the descent and progress of the Arabs; and the defeat of his
lieutenant

Edeco, who had been commanded to seize and bind the presumptuous strangers,

admonished Roderic of the magnitude of the danger. At the royal summons, the

dukes, and counts, the bishops and nobles of the Gothic monarchy, assembled at

the head of their followers; and the title of king of the Romans, which is
employed

by an Arabic-historian, may be excused by the close affinity of language,
religion,

and manners, between the nations of Spain. His army consisted of ninety or a
hun­

dred thousand men; a formidable power, if their fidelity and discipline had
been

adequate to their numbers. The troops of Tarik had been augmented to twelve

thousand Saracens; but the Christian malecontents were attracted by the
influence

of Julian, and a crowd of Africans most greedily tasted the temporal blessings
of

the Koran. In the neighbourhood of Cadiz, the town of Xeres(5) has been illus­

trated by the encounter which determined the fate of the kingdom; the stream
of

the Guadalete, which falls into the bay, divided the two camps, and marked the

advancing and retreating skirmishes of three successive and bloody days. On
the

fourth day, the two armies joined a more serious and decisive issue; but
Alaric

would have blushed at the sight of his unworthy successor, sustaining on his
head

a diadem of pearls, encumbered with a flowing robe of gold and silken
embroide­

ry, and reclining on a litter, or car of ivory, drawn by two white mules. Not­

withstanding the valour of the Saracens, they fainted under the weight of
multi­

tudes, and the plain of Xeres was overspread with sixteen thousand of their
dead

bodies. " My brethren," said Tarik to his surviving companions, " the enemy is

before you, the sea is behind; whither would ye fly? Follow your general; I am

resolved either to lose my life, or to trample on the prostrate king of the
Romans."

Besides the resource of despair, he confided in the secret correspondence and
noc­

turnal interviews of count Julian, with the sons and the brother of Witiza.
The

106.182. 252.319—332. On this occasion, the industry of Pagi has been aided by
the Arabic learning of his

friend the abbe de Longuerue, and to their joint labour) I am deeply indebted.
* •

(1) A mistake of Roderic of Toleda.in comparing the lunar years of the Hegira
with the Julian years of the

era, has determined Baronius, Mariana, and the crowd of Spanish historians, to
place the first invasion in the

year 713,and the battle of Xeres in Novembrr714. This anachronism of three
years has been detected by the

more correct industry of modem chronologists, above all. of Pagi. (Critica,
torn. iii. p. 169. 171—174.) who hare

restored the genuine state of the revolution. At the present time an Arabian
scholar, like Cardonne, who

adopts the ancient error, (torn. i. p. 75.) is inexcusably ignorant or
careless.

(2) The era of Csesar, which in Spain was in legal and popular use titi the
fourteenth century, begins thirty -

eight years before the birth of Christ. I would refer the origin to the
general peace by sea and land, which

confi rmed the power and partition of the triumvirs. (Dion. Cassins, lib. 48.
p. 547. 553. Appian de Bell. Civil,

lib. t. p. 1034. edit, fol.) Spain was a province of Caesar Octavian; and
Tarraponn, which raised the first tem­

ple to Augustus, (Tacit. Anna!. 1. 78.) might borrow from the orientals this
modeof flattery.

(3) The road, the country, the old castle of count Julian, and the
superstitious belief of the Spaniards of hid -

tlen treasures, &c. are described by Pere Labat (Voyages en Espagne et en
Italie, torn. i. p. 207—217.) with his

usual pleasantry.

(4) The Nubian geographer (p. 154.) explains the topography of the war; but it
is highly incredible that the

lieutenant of Musa should execute the desperate and useless measure of burning
his ships.

(5) Xeres (the Roman colony of Asta Regia) is only two leagues from Cadiz. In
the sixteenth century it

was a granary of corn; and the wine of Xeres is familiar to the nations of
Europe. (Lml. Nonit Hispania. c. 13.

1>, SA—56. a work of correct and concise know ledge; d'Anviile, Etats dc
PEurope, fee p. 154.)

