OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 49

tired and twenty miles, a rare variety of soil and climate; the intermediate
valleys

and elevated plains abound with rich pastures, perpetual streams, and fruits
of a

delicious taste and uncommon magnitude. This fair solitude is decorated with
the

ruins of Lambesa, a Roman city, once the seat of a legion, and the residence
of

forty thousand inhabitants. The Ionic temple of iEsculapius is encompassed
with

Moorish huts; and the cattle now graze in the midst of an amphitheatre, under

the shade of Corinthian columns. A sharp perpendicular rock rises above the

level of the mountain, where the African princes deposited their wives and
trea­

sure; and a proverb is familiar to the Arabs, that the man may eat fire, who
dares

to attack the craggy cliffs and inhospitable natives of mount Aurasius. This
har­

dy enterprise was twice attempted by the eunuch Solomon: from the first, he
re­

treated with some disgrace; and in the second, his patience and provisions
were

almost exhausted; and he must again have retired, if he had not yielded to the
im-

tuous courage of his troops, who audaciously scaled, to the astonishment of
the

oors, the mountain, the hostile camp, and the summit of the Geminian rock.

A citadel was erected to secure this important conquest, and to remind the
barba­

rians of their defeat: and as Solomon pursued his march to the west, the long-
lost

province of Mauritanian Sitifi was again annexed to the Roman empire. The

Moorish war continued several years after the departure of Belisarius; but the

laurels which he resigned to a faithful lieutenant, may be justly ascribed to
his own

triumph.

The experience of past faults, which may sometimes correct the mature age of

an individual, is seldom profitable to the successive generations of mankind.
The

nations of antiquity, careless of each others safety were separately
vanquished and

•enslaved by the Romans. This awful lesson might have instructed the
barbarians

of the west to oppose, with timely counsels and confederate arms, the
unbounded

ambition of Justinian. Yet the same error was repeated, the same consequences

were felt, and the Goths, both of Italy and Spain, insensible of their
approaching

danger, beheld with indifference, and even with joy, the rapid downfal of the

Vandals. After the failure of the royal line, Theudes, a valiant and powerful

chief, ascended the throne of Spain, which he had formerly administered in the

name of Theodoric, and his infant grandson. Under his command, the Visigoths

besieged the fortress of Ceuta on the African coast: but, while they spent the
sab­

bath day in peace and devotion, the pious security of their camp was invaded
by a

sally from the town; and the king himself, with some difficulty and danger,
es­

caped from the hands of a sacrilegious enemy. (1) It was not long before his
pride

and resentment were gratified by a suppliant embassj' from the unfortunate
Geli-

mer, who implored, in his distress, the aid of the Spanish monarch. But,
instead

of sacrificing these unworthy passions to the dictates of generosity and
prudence,

Theudes amused the ambassadors, till he was secretly informed of the loss of
Car­

thage, and then dismissed them with the obscure and contemptuous advice, to
seek

in their native country a true knowledge of the state of the Vandals.(2) The

long continuance of the Italian war delayed the punishment of the Visigoths;
and

the eyes of Theudes were closed before they tasted the fruits of his mistaken
po­

licy. After his death, the sceptre of Spain was disputed by a civil war. The

weaker candidate solicited the protection of Justinian; and ambitiously
subscribed

a treaty of alliance, which deeply wounded the independence and happiness of
bis

country. Several cities, both on the ocean and the Mediterranean, were ceded
to

the Roman troops, who afterwards refused to evacuate those pledges, as it
should

seem, either of safety or payment; and as they were fortified by perpetual
sup­

plies from Africa, they maintained their impregnable stations, for the
mischie­

vous purpose of inflaming the civil and religious factions of the barbarians.
Se­

venty years elapsed before this painful thorn could be extirpated from the

bosom of the monarchy; and as long as the emperors retained any share of

these remote and useless possessions, their vanity might number Spain in the
list of

their provinces, and the successors of Alaric in the rank of their vassals.
(3)

The eiTor of the Goths who reigned in Italy was less excusable than that of

their Spanish brethren, and their punishment was still more immediate and
terri-

(1) Iiidor. Chron. p. 72S. edit. Grot. Mariana, Hist. Hispan. lib. t. c. 8. p.
175. Yet according to Isidore, the

>iege of Ceuta, and the death of Theudes, happened, A.M. H. 586. A. D. 548.
and the place was defended, not

by the Vandali, but by the Roman*. •

(2) Procopius, Vandal, lib. i. c. 24.

(3) See the original chronicle of Isidore, and the fifth and sixth books of
the History of Spain by Mariana.

The Itomani were finally ejpelled by SuintiU), the king of the Visigoths, (A.
D. 621-6260 after thejtr reunion

to the catholic church.

Vol. HI 7

