S94 THE DECLINE AND FALL

Christian tyrant to their brethren of the north; the ocean and Mediterranean
were

covered with their piratical fleets; and Charlemagne beheld with a sigh the
de­

structive progress of the Normans, who, in less than seventy years,
precipitated

the fall of his race and monarchy.

Had the pope and the Romans revived the primitive constitution, the titles of

emperor and Augustus were conferred on Charlemagne for the term of his life;

and his successors, on each vacancy, must have ascended the throne by a formal

or tacit election. But the association of his son Lewis the Pious asserts the
inde-

{>endent right of monarchy and conquest, and the emperor seems on this
occasion to

lave foreseen and prevented the latent claims of the clergy. The royal youth
was

commanded to take the crown from the altar, and with his own hands to place it

on his head, as a gift which he held from God, his father, and the nation. (1)
The

same ceremony was repeated, though with less energy, in the subsequent
associa­

tions of Lothaire and Lewis II.; the Carlovingian sceptre was transmitted from

father to son in a lineal descent of four generations; and the ambition of the
popes

was reduced to the empty honour of crowning and anointing these hereditary

princes who were already invested with the power and dominion. The pious

Lewis survived his brothers, and embraced the whole empire of Charlemagne;

but the nations and the nobles, his bishops and his children, quickly
discerned that

this mighty mass was no longer inspired by the same soul; and the foundations
were

undermined to the centre, while the external surface was yet fair and entire.
Af­

ter a war or battle, which consumed one hundred thousand Franks, the empire

was divided by treaty between his three sons, who had violated every filial
and

fraternal duty. The kingdoms of Germany and France were for ever separated;

the provinces of Gaul, between the Rhone and the Alps: the Meuse and the
Rhine,

were assigned, with Italy, to the imperial dignity of Lothaire. In the
partition of

his share, Loraine and Aries, two recent and transitory kingdoms, were
bestowed

on the younger children; and Lewis II. his eldest son, was content with the
realm

of Italy, the proper and sufficient patrimony of a Roman emperor. On his death

without any male issue, the vacant throne was disputed by his uncles and
cousins,

and the popes most dexterously seized the occasion of judging the claims and
me­

rits of the candidates, and of bestowing on the most obsequious, or most
liberal,

the imperial office of advocate of the Roman church. The dregs of the Carlo­

vingian race no longer exhibited any symptoms of virtue or power, and the
ridi­

culous epithets of the bald, the stammerer, the fat, and the simfile,
distinguished

the tame and uniform features of a crowd of kings alike deserving of oblivion.
By

the failure of the-collateral branches, the whole inheritance devolved to
Charles

the Fat, the last emperor of his family; his insanity authorized the desertion
of

Germany, Italy, and France: he was deposed in a diet, and solicited his daily
bread

from the rebels by whose contempt his life and liberty had been spared.
Accord­

ing to the measure of their force, the governors, the bishops, and the lords,
usurped

the fragments of the falling empire; and some preference was shown to the
female

or illegitimate blood of Charlemagne. Of the greater part, the title and
possession

were alike doubtful, and the merit was adequate to the contracted scale of
their

dominions. Those who could appear with an army at the gates of Rome were

crowned emperors in the Vatican, but their modesty was more frequently
satisfied

with the appellation of kings of Italy; and the whole term of seventy-four
years

may be deemed a vacancy, from the abdication of Charles the Fat to the
establish­

ment of Otho I.

Otho(2) was of the noble race of the dukes of Saxony; and, if he truly
descended

from Wittikind, the adversary and proselyte of Charlemagne, the posterity of

a vanquished people was exalted to reign over their conquerors. His father
Hen­

ry the Fowler was elected, by the suffrage of the nation, to save and
institute the

kingdom of Germany. Its limits(3) were enlarged on every side by his son, the

(1) Thegan. the biographer of Lewis, relates this coronation; and Bsronius has
honestly transcribed if, (A.

D. 813. no. 13, 8ce. see Gaitlard, torn. it. p. 506—508.) howsoever adverseto
the claims of the popes. For the se­

ries of the Carlovingian*, see the historians of France, Italy, and Germany;
Pfeffel, Schmidt, Velly, Murato-

ri, and even Voltaire, whose pictures are sometimes just, and always pleasing.

(2) He was the son of Otho, the son of Ludolph, in whose favour the duchy of
Saxony had been instituted.

A. D. 858. Ruotgerus, the biographer of a St. Bruno, (Bibliot. Brunanianse
Catalog, torn. iii. vol. ii. p. 679.;

gives a splendid character of his family. Atavorum atavi usque ad hominum
mcmoriflm omnes nobilissimt;

nullis in eorum stirpe ignotus, nullis degener facile reperitur. (apud
Strnvinm, Corp. Hist. German, p. 216.)

Yet Gnndling (in Henrico Aucupe) is not satisfied of his descent from
Wittikind.

(3) See the treatise of Coringius; (de Finibus Imperii Germanici, Francofurt.
1680, in quarto) be rejects the

extravagant and improper scale of the Roman and Carlovingian empires, and
discusses with moderation the

"igrtt* of Germany* fcef>vsjssat9,and her neighbours.

