OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

den of a solitary matron, sounded their trumpets, surprised the sentinels, and
gave

admittance to their companions, who, on all sides, scaled the walls, and burst
open

the gates of the city. Every crime which is punished by social justice, was
prac­

tised as the rights of war; the Huns were distinguished by cruelty and
sacrilege,

and Belisarius alone appeared in the streets and churches of Naples, to
moderate

the calamities which he predicted. " The gold and silver," he repeatedly ex­

claimed, "are the just rewards of your valour. But spare the inhabitants, they

are Christians, they are suppliants, they are now your fellow-subjects.
Restore

the children to their parents, the wives to their husbands; and show them, by
your

generosity, of what friends they have obstinately deprived themselves." The

city was saved by the virtue and authority of its conqueror,(l) and when the
Nea­

politans returned to their houses, they found some consolation in the secret
enjoy­

ment of their hidden treasures. The barbarian garrison enlisted in the service

of the emperor; Apulia and Calabria, delivered from the odious presence of the

Goths, acknowledged his dominion; and the tusks of the Calydoman boar, which

■were still shown at Beneventum, are curiously described by the historian of
Beli­

sarius. (2)

The faithful soldiers and citizens of Naples had expected their deliverance
from

a prince, who remained the inactive and almost indifferent spectator of their
ruin.

Theodatus secured his person within the walls of Rome, while his cavalry ad­

vanced forty miles on the Appian way, and encamped in the Pomptine marshes;

which, by a canal of nineteen miles in length, had been recently drained and
con­

verted into excellent pastures. (3) But the principal forces of the Goths were
dis­

persed in Dalmatia, Venetia, and Gaul; and the feeble mind of their king was
con­

founded by the unsuccessful event of a divination, which seemed to presage the

downfal of his empire. (4) The most abject slaves have arraigned the guilt, or

weakness of an unfortunate master. The character of Theodatus was rigorously

scrutinized by a free and idle camp of barbarians, conscious of their
privilege and

power: he was declared unworthy of his race, his nation, and his throne; and
their

general Vitiges, whose valour had been signalized in the Illyrian war, was
raised,

with unanimous applause, on the bucklers of his companions. On the first
rumour,

the abdicated monarch fled from the justice of his country; but he was pursued
by

private revenge. A Goth, whom he had injured in his love, overtookTheodatus

on the Flaminian way; and, regardless of his unmanly cries, slaughtered him,
as

he lay prostrate on the ground, like a victim (says the historian) at the foot
of the

altar. _ The choice of the people is the best and purest title to reign over
them: yet

such is the prejudice of every age, that Vitiges impatiently wished to return
to

Ravenna, where he might seize, with the reluctant hand of the daughter of Ama-

lasontha, some faint shadow of hereditary right. A national council was
immedi­

ately held, and the new monarch reconciled the impatient spirit of the
barbarians,

a measure of disgrace, which the misconduct of his predecessor rendered wise

and indispensable. The Goths, consented to retreat in the presence of a vic­

torious enemy; to delay till the next spring the operations of offensive war;
to

summon their scattered forces; to relinquish their distant possessions, and to

trust even Rome itself to the faith of its inhabitants. Leuderis, an aged
warrior,

was left in the capital with four thousand soldiers; a feeble garrison, which
might

have seconded the zeal, though it was incapable of opposing the wishes of the
Ro­

mans. But a momentary enthusiasm of religion and patriotism was kindled in

their minds. They furiously exclaimed, that the apostolic throne should no
longer

be profaned by the triumph or toleration of Arianism; that the tombs of the
Cae­

sars should no longer be trampled by the savages of the north; and, without
re­

flecting that Italy must sink into a province of Constantinople, they fondly
hailed

the restoration of a Roman emperor as a new era of freedom and prosperity.

The deputies Of the pope and clergy, of the senate and people, invited the
Iieu-

(1) Belisarius was repro ved by Pope Sylverius for the massacre. He repenpled
Naples, and imported colonies

of African captives into Sicily, Calabria, and Apulia (Hist. Miscell. lib.
xvi. in Muratori. torn. i. p. 196,107.)

(2) Beneventum was built by Diomede,the nephew of Melager. (Clover, torn. ii.
p. 1195,11960 TheCaly-

donian hunt is a picture of savage life. (Ovid. Metamorph. lib. viii.) Thirty
or forty heroes were leagued

against a bog: the brutes (not the hog) quarrelled with a lady for the head.

(3) The Decennovium is strangely confounded by Cluverius (torn. ii. p. 1007.)
with the river Ufens. It wan

in truth a canal of nineteen miles, from Forum Appii to Terracina, on which
Horace embarked in the night.

The Decennovium, which is mentioned by Lucan, Dion Cassius. and Cassiodorus,
has been sufficiently ruined,

restored, and obliterated. (D'Anville, Analyse de Italic, p. 185, 8tc.)

(4; A jew gratified his contempt and hatred for all the Christians, by
enclosing three bands, each or ten hogs,

and discriminated by the names of Goths, Greeks, and Romans. Of the first,
almost all were found dead—al­

most all the second were alive—of .the third, half dead, and the rest lost
their bristles. No unsuitable emblem

'Of the .event.

