30 THE DECLINE AND FALL

afforded a retreat to the cattle of the besieged. The inner wall was a
monument

of strength and beauty: it measured sixty feet from the ground, and the height

of the towers was one hundred feet; the loop-holes from whence an enemy might

be annoyed with missile weapons, were small but numerous: the soldiers were

planted along the rampart, under the shelter of double galleries, and a third
plat­

form, spacious and secure, was raised on the summit of the towers. The exteri­

or wall appears to have been less lofty, but more solid; and each tower was
pro­

tected by a quadrangular bulwark. A hard rocky soil resisted the tools of the
mi­

ners, and on the south-east, where the ground was more tractable, their
approach

was retarded by a new work, which advanced in the shape of a half-moon.. The

double and treble ditches were filled with a stream of water; and in the
manage­

ment of the river, the most skilful labour was employed to supply the
inhabitants,

to distress the besiegers, and to prevent the mischiefs of a natural or
artificial

inundation. Dara continued more than sixty years to fulfil the wishes of its
foun­

ders and to provoke the jealousy of the Persians, who incessantly complained,
that

this impregnable fortress had been constructed in manifest violation of the
treaty

of peace between the two empires.

Between the Euxine and the Caspian, the countries of Cholchos, Iberia, and

Albania, are intersected in every direction by the branches of mount Caucasus;

and the two principal gates, or passes, from north to south, have been
frequently

confounded in the geography both of the ancients and moderns. The name of

Caspian or Albanian gates, is properly applied to Derbend.(l) which occupies a

short declivity between the mountains and the sea; the city, if we give credit
to

local tradition, had been founded by the Greeks; and this dangerous entrance
was

fortified by the kings of Persia with a mole, double walls, and doors of iron.
The

Iberian gates(2) are formed by a narrow passage of six miles in mount
Caucasus,

which opens from the northern side of Iberia or Georgia, into the plain that

reaches to the Tanais and the Volga. A fortress, designed by Alexander, per­

haps, or one of his successors, to command that important pass, had descended
by

right of conquest or inheritance to a prince of the Huns, who offered it for a
mo­

derate price to the emperor; but while Anastasius paused, while he timorously

computed the cost and the distance, a more vigilant rival interposed, and
Cabades

forcibly occupied the straits of Caucasus. The Albanian and Iberian gates ex­

cluded the horsemen of Scythia from the shortest and most practicable roads,
and

the whole front of the mountain was covered by the rampart of Gog and Magog,

the long wall which has excited the curiosity of an Arabian caliph(3) and a
Rus­

sian conqueror. (4) Accordingto a recent description, hugestone, seven feet
thick,

twenty-one feet in length, or height, are artificially joined without iron or
cement,

to compose a wall which runs above three hundred miles from the shores of Der­

bend, over the hills and through the valleys of Daghestan and Georgia. With­

out a vision, such a work might be undertaken by the policy of Cabades;
without

a miracle, it might be accomplished by his son, so formidable to the Romans

under the name of Chosroes; so dear to the orientals, under the appellation of

Nushirwan. The Persian monarch held in his hand the keys both of peace and

war; but he stipulated in every treaty, that Justinian should contribute to
the ex­

pense of a common barrier, which equally protected the two empires from the
in­

roads of the Scythians. (5)

VII. Justinian suppressed the schools of Athens and the consulship of Rome,

which had given so many sages and heroes to mankind. Both these institutions

Tiad long since degenerated from their primitive glory; yet some reproach may
be

justly inflicted on the avarice and jealousy of a prince, by whose hands such
vene­

rable ruins were destroyed.

Athens, after her Persian triumphs, adopted the philosophy of Ionia and the

rhetoric of Sicily; and these studies became the patrimony of a city whose
inha-

(1) For *he city and pais of Derbend, see d'Herbelot (Bibliot. Orient, p. 157.
291. 807.0 Petite de la Croix

(Hist, de Gengiscan. lib. iv. c. 9.0 Histoire Genealogique de Tatars (torn, i.
p. 122.,) Olenitis (Voyage cn Perse,

p. 1039—1041.0 and Corneille le Brune (Voyages, torn. i. p. 146. 147.0 bis
view may be compared with the plan

of Olearius, who judges the wall to be of shells and gravel hardened by time.

(2) Procopiiis, though with some confusion, always denominates them Caspian
(Persic, lib. i. c. 10.) The pass

is now styled Tatartopa, the Tartar gates (d'Anville, Geographie Ancienne,
torn. ii. p. 119,120.)

(3) The imaginary rampart of Gog and Mngog, which was seriously explored and
believed by a caliph of the

ninth century, appears to he derived from the gates of mount Caucasus, and a
vague report of the wall of

China. (Geograph. Nubiensis, p. 267—270. Memoires de F Academic, torn. xxxi.
p. 210—219.)

(4) See a learned dissertation of Baler, de mura Caucaseo, in Comment. Aead.
Petropol. ann. 1726. torn. i. p.

425—463. but it is destitute of a map or plan. When the Czar Peter I. became
master of Derbend in the year

1722, the measure of the wall was found to be three thousand two hundred and
eighty-five Russian orgygie, or

fathoms, each of seven feet English; in the whole somewhat more than four
miles in length.

(5) See the fortifications and treaties of Chosroes or Nushirwan, in Procopius
(Persic lib. i. c. 16. 22. lib. U0

and d'Herbelot (p. 6320

