60 THE DECLINE AND FALL

the slaves; required his soldiers to dismiss their male and female
attendants^and

regulated their allowance, that one moiety should be given in provisions, and
the

other in money. His foresight was justified by the increase of the public
distress*

as soon as the Goths had occupied two rmportants posts in the neighbourhood of

Rome by the loss of the port, or, as it is now called, the city of Porto, he
was de­

prived of the country on the right of the Tiber, and the best communication
with

the sea; and he reflected with grief and anger, that three hundred men, could
he

have spared such a feeble band, might have defended its impregnable works.

Seven miles from the capital, between the Appian and the Latin ways, two prin­

cipal aqueducts, crossing, and again crossing each other, enclosed within
their solid

and lofty arches a fortified space, (1) where Vitiges established a camp of
seven

thousand Goths to intercept the convoys of Sicily and Campania. The granaries

of Rome were insensibly exhausted, the adjacent country had been wasted with
fire

and sword} and such scanty supplies as might yet be obtained by hasty
excursions,

were the reward of valour, and the purchase of wealth: the forage of the
horses,

and the bread of the soldiers, never failed; but in the last months of the
siege, the

people were exposed to the miseries of scarcity, unwholesome food,(2) and con­

tagious disorders. Belisarius saw and pitied their sufferings; but he had
foreseen

and he watched the decay of their loyalty, and the progress of their
discontent.

Adversity had awakened the Romans from the dreams of grandeur and freedom,

and taught them the humiliating lesson, that it was of small moment to their
real

happiness, whether the name of their master was derived from the Gothic or the

Latin language. The lieutenant of Justinian listened to their just complaints,
but

he rejected with disdain the idea of flight or capitulation: repressed their
clamo­

rous impatience for battle; amused them with the prospect of sure and speedy

relief; and secured himself and the city from the effects of their despair or
trea­

chery. Twice in each month he changed the station of the officers to whom the

custody of the gates was committed: the various precautions, of patroles,
watch­

words, lights, and music, were repeatedly employed to discover whatever passed

on the rampafts; out-guards were posted beyond the ditch, and the trusty
vigilance

of dogs supplied the more doubtful fidelity of mankind. A letter was
intercepted,

which assured the king of the Goths, that the Asinarian gate, adjoining to the
La-

teran church, should be secretly opened to his troops. On the proof of
suspicion

of treason, several senators were banished, and the pope Sylverius was
summoned

to attend the representative of his sovereign, at his head-quarters in the
Pincian

palace. (3) The ecclesiastics who followed their bishop, were detained in the
first

or second apartment, (4) and he alone was admitted to the presence of
Belisarius.

Uhe conqueror of Rome and Carthage was modestly seated at the feet of
Antonina,

who reclined on a stately couch: the general was silent, but the voice of
reproach

and menace issued from the mouth of his imuerious wife. Accused by credible

witnesses, and the evidence of his own subscription, the successor of St.
Peter

was despoiled of his pontifical ornaments, clad in a mean habit of a monk, and

embarked, without delay, for a distant exile in the east. At the emperor's
com­

mand, the clergy of Rome proceeded to the choice of a new bishop; and after a

solemn invocation of the Holy Ghost, elected the deacon Vigilius, who had pur­

chased the papal throne by a bribe of two hundred pounds of gold. The profit,

and consequently the guilt, of this simony, was imputed to Belisarius.-but the
hero

obeyed the orders of his wife. Antonina served the passions of the empress;
and

Theodora lavished her treasures, in the vain hope of obtaining a pontiff
hostile or

indifferent to the council of Chalcedon. (5)

(1) Proeopjui (Goth, lib. ii. c. 3.) has forgot to name these aqueducts: nor
can such a double intersection, at

such a distance from Rome, be clearly ascertained from the writings of
Frontinus Fabretti and Esehinard, de

Aquis and de Aero Romano, or from the local maps of Lameti and Cingolani.
Seven or eight miles from the

city (fifty stadia,) on the road to Albano, between the Latin and Appian ways,
I discern the remains of an

aqueduct (probably the Septimian,) a series (six hundred and thirty paces) of
arches twenty-fire feet high

IKpqAAi etrstyctv.)

(2) They made sausages, «x\«t»?, of mules' flesh: unwholesome, if the animals
had died of the plague.

Otherwise the famous Bologna sausages are said to be made of ass' flesh
(Voyages deLabat,tom.ii.p.21lJ •

(3) The name of thepalace, the hill,and the adjoining gatefwereall derived
from the senator Pincitit. Some

recent vestiges of temples and churches are now smoothed in the garden of the
Minims of the Trinita del

Monte (Nardini, lib. iv. c. 7. p. 136. Esehinard, p. 209, 210. the old plan of
BufTxlino, and the great plan of

Kolli.) Belisarius has fixed his station between the Pincian and Salarian
gates (Procop. Goth. lib. i. c. 15.)

(4) From the mention of the primum et secundum velum, it should seem that
Belisarius, even in a liege,re-

preiented the emperor, and maintained the proud ceremonial of the Byzantine
palace. *

(5) Of this act of sacrilege, Procoptim (Goth. lib. i. c. 25.) is a dry ahd
reluctant witness. The narratives of

Liberatus (Breviarium, e. 22.) and Anastasius (de Vit. Pont. p. 39.,) are
characteristic, but passionate. Hear

the execrations of cardinal Baronius (A. D. 536. No. 1S3. A. D. 538. No.
4-20.;) nonentum, (acinus omni e«.

ctatioue dignum.

