OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 218

end of four hundred years, the Montanists of Phrygia,(l) still breathed the
wild

enthusiasm of perfection and prophecy, which they had imbibed from their male

and female apostles, the special organs of the Paraclete. On the approach of
the

catholic priests and soldiers, they grasped with alacrity the crown of
martyrdom;

the conventicle and the congregation perished in the flames; but these
primitive

fanatics were not extinguished three hundred years after the death of their
tyrant.

Under the protection of the Gothic confederates, the church of the Arians of

Constantinople had braved the severity of the laws; their clergy equalled the

wealth a^l magnificence of the senate; and the gold and silver, which were
seized

by the rapacious hand of Justinian, might perhaps be claimed as the spoils of
the

provinces and the trophies of the barbarians. A second remnant of pagans, who

still lurked in the most refined and the most rustic conditions of mankind,
excited

the indignation of the Christians, who were perhaps unwilling that any
strangers

should be the witnesses of their intestine quarrels. A bishop was named as the

inquisitor of the faith, and his diligence soon discovered, in the court and
city, the

magistrates, lawyers, physicians, and sophists, who still cherished the
superstition

of the Greeks. They were sternly informed that they must choose without delay

between the displeasure of Jupiter or Justinian, and that their aversion to
the gos­

pel could no longer be disguised under the scandalous mask of indifference or
im­

piety. The patrician Photius perhaps alone was resolved to live and to die
like his

ancestors: he enfranchised himself with the stroke of a dagger, and left his
tyrant

the poor consolation of exposing with ignominy the lifeless corpse of the
fugitive.

His weaker brethren submitted to their earthly monarch, underwent the cere­

mony of baptism, and laboured, by their extraordinary zeal, to erase the
suspicion,

or to expiate the guilt, of idolatry. The native country of Homer, and the
thea­

tre of the Trojan war, still retained the last sparks of his mythology: by the
care

of the same bishop, seventy thousand pagans were detected and converted in
Asia,

Phrygia, Lydia, and Caria; ninety-six churches were built for the new
proselytes;

and linen vestments, Bibles, and liturgies, and vases of gold and silver, were
sup­

plied by the pious munificence of Justinian. (2) The Jews, who had been
gradually

stripped of their immunities, were oppressed by a vexatious law, which
compelled

them to observe the festival of Easter the same day on which is was celebrated

by the Christians. (3) And they might complain with the more reason, since the

catholics themselves did not agree with the astronomical calculations of their
so­

vereign: the people of Constantinople delayed the beginning of their Lent a
whole

week after it had been ordained by authority; and they had the pleasure of
fasting

seven days, while meat was exposed for sale by the command of the emperor. The

Samaritans of Palestine, (4) were a motley race, an ambiguous sect, rejected
as

Jews by the pagans, by the Jews as schismatics, and by the Christians as
idola­

ters. The abomination of the cross had already been planted on their holy
mount

of Garizim,(5) but the persecution of Justinian offered only the alternative
of bap­

tism or rebellion. They chose the latter: under the standard of a desperate

leader, they rose in arms, and retaliated their wrongs on the lives, the
property,

and the temples of a defenceless people. The Samaritans were finally subdued

by the regular forces of the east; twenty thousand were slain, twenty thousand

were sold by the Arabs to the infidels of Persia and India, and the remains of
that

unhappy nation atoned for the crime of treason by the sin of hypocrisy. It has

been computed that one hundred thousand Roman subjects were extirpated in the

Samaritan war,(6) which converted the once fruitful province into a desolate
and

smoking wilderness. But in the creed of Justinian, the guilt of murder could
not

(1) See the character and principles of the Montanists, in Moiheim, de Rchus
Christ, ante Constantlnum,

p. 410-12.1.

(2) Theophan. Chron. p. 153. John de Monophysite bishop of Asia, is a more
authentic witness of this trans­

action.in which he was himself employed by the emperor. (Asieiuan. Rib.
Orient, torn. ii. p. 85.)

(3) Compare Proeopiu, (Hist. Atean. c. 2». and Aleman'l Notes with Theophanes.
(Chron. p. 190.) The

council of Nice has intrusted the patriarch, or rather the aitronomers of
Alexandria, with the usual procla­

mation of Kastei; and we still read, or rather we do not read, many of the
Paschal epistles of St. Cyril. Since

the reign of Munophytism in Egypt, the catholics were perplexed by as foolish
a prejudice as that which so

long opposed, among the protestants, the reception of the Gregorian style.

(4) For the religion and history of the Samaritans, consult Basnage, Histoires
des Juifs. a learned and im­

partial work.

(5) Sicbem, Neapolis. Nnplous, the ancient and modern seat of the Samaritans,
is situate in ft valley be­

tween the barren Ebal, the mountain of cursing to the north, the fruttfu I
Garizim, or mountain of coning

to the south, ten or eleven hours' travel from Jerusalem. Sec Mnundrel.
Journey from Aleppo, tic. p. 39—63.

(6) Procop. Anecdot. c. xi. Tbeophan. Chron. p. 152. John Malata, Chron. torn.
ii. p. G2. I remember ait

observation, half philosophical, half superstitiout, that the province which
had been ruiard by the fcjgQtry

uf Justinian, was the tainu through which the Mahometans penetrated into
theenyuce.

