94 THE DECLINE AND FALL

CHAPTER XLIII.

Rebellions of Africa.—Restoration of the Gothic kingdom by Totila.—Loss and
recovery

of Some.—Final conquest of Italy by Narses Extinction of the Ostrogoths.—De­

feat of the Franks and Alemanni Last victory, disgrace, and death, of
Belisarius.—-

Death and character of Justinian.—Comet, earthquakes, and plague.

The review of the nations from the Danube to the Nile, has exposed on every

side the weakness of the Romans; and our wonder is reasonably excited that
they

should presume to enlarge an empire, whose ancient limits they were incapable
of

defending. But the wars, the conquests, and the triumphs of Justinian, are the

feeble and pernicious efforts of old age, which exhaust the remains of
strength,

and accelerate the decay of the powers of life. He exulted in the glorious act
of

restoring Africa and Italy to the republic; but the calamities which followed
the

departure of Belisarius betrayed the impotence of the conqueror, and
accomplished

the ruin of those unfortunate countries.

From his new acquisitions, Justinian expected that his avarice, as well as
pride,

should be richly gratified. A rapacious minister of the finances closely
pursued

the footsteps of Belisarius; and as the old registers of tribute had been
burnt by

the Vandals, he indulged his fancy in a liberal calculation and arbitrary
assess­

ment of the wealth of Africa. (1) The increase of taxes, which were drawn

away by a distant sovereign, and a general resumption of the-patrimony or
crown

lands, soon dispelled the intoxication of the public joy: but the emperor was
insen­

sible to the modest complaints of the people, till he was awakened and alarmed
by

the clamours of military discontent. Many of the Roman soldiers had married
the

•widows and daughters of the Vandals. As their own, by the double right of
con­

quest and inheritance, they claimed the estates which Genseric had assigned to

his victorious troops. They heard with disdain the cold and selfish
representa­

tions of their officers; that the liberality of Justinian had raised them from
a sa­

vage or servile condition; that they were already enriched by the spoils of
Africa,

the treasure, the slaves, and the moveables, of the vanquished barbarians; and

that the ancient and lawful patrimony of the emperors would be applied only to

the support of that government on which their own safety and reward must ulti­

mately depend. The mutiny was secretly inflamed by a thousand soldiers, for

the most part Heruli, who had imbibed the doctrines, and were instigated by
the

clergy, of the Arian sect; and the cause of perjury and rebellion was.
sanctified by

the dispensing powers of fanaticism. The Arians deplored the ruin of their
church,

triumphant above a century in Africa; and they were justly provoked by the
laws

of the conqueror, which interdicted the baptism of their children, and the
exer­

cise of all religious worship. Of the Vandals chosen by Belisarius, the far
greater

part, in the honours of the eastern service, forgot their country and
religion. But

a generous band of four hundred obliged the mariners, when they were in sight
of

the isle of Lesbos, to alter their course: they touched on Peloponnesus, ran
ashore

on a desert coast of Africa, and boldly erected on mount Aurasius, the
standard of

independence and revolt. While the troops of the province disclaimed the com­

mand of their superiors, a conspiracy was formed at Carthage against the life
of

Solomon, who filled with honour the place of Belisarius; and the Arians had
pi­

ously resolved to sacrifice the tyrant at the foot of the altar, during the
awful mys­

teries of the festival of Easter. Fear or remorse restrained the daggers of
the as­

sassins, but the patience of Solomon emboldened their discontent; and at the
end

of ten days, a furious sedition was kindled in the circus, which desolated
Africa

above ten years. The pillage of the city, and the indiscriminate slaughter of
its

inhabitants, were suspended only by darkness, sleep, and intoxication: the go­

vernor, with seven companions, among whom was the historian Procopius, escaped

to Sicily: two-thirds of the army were involved in the guilt of treason, and
eight

(1) For the troubles of Africa, I neither have nor desire another guide than
Procopius, whose eye contem­

plated the image, and whose ear collected the reports of the memorable events
of his own times. In the se­

cond book of the Vandalic war he relates the revolt of Stoza (c. 14—24..) the
return of Belisarius (c. 15.) the

victory of Germanus (e. 16—18.,) the second administration of Solomon (c.
19—21.,) the government of Sergius

(c. 22,23.,) of Areobindus (c. 24.,) the tyranny and death of Gontharis Cc.
2S—St.;) nor can I discern «nv symp­

toms of flattery or malevolence in his'various portraits'.

