OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, la J

ture of criminal and civil jurisprudence. Our duties to the state are simple
and

uniform; the law by which he is condemned, is inscribed, not only on brass or

marble, but on the conscience of the offender, and his guilt is commonly
proved

by the testimony of a single fact. But our relations to each other are various
and

infinite: our obligations are created, annulled, and modified, by injuries,
benefits,

and promises; and the interpretation of voluntary contracts and testaments,
which

are often dictated by fraud or ignorance, affords a long and laborious
exercise to

the sagacity of the judge. The business of life is multiplied by the extent of

commerce and dominion, and the residence of the parties in the distant
provinces

of an empire, is productive of doubt, delay, and inevitable appeals from the
local

to the supreme magistrate. Justinian, the Greek emperor ot Constantinople and

the east, was the legal successor of the Latian shepherd, who had planted a
colo­

ny on the banks of the Tiber. In a period of thirteen hundred years, the laws

had reluctantly followed the changes of government and manners: and the lauda­

ble desire of conciliating ancient names with recent institutions, destroyed
the

harmony and swelled the magnitude, of the obscure and irregular system. The

laws which excuse on any occasions the ignorance of their subjects, confess
their

own imperfections; the civil jurisprudence, as it was abridged by Justinian,
still

continued a mysterious science and a profitable trade, and the innate
perplexity

of the study was involved in tenfold darkness by the private industry of the
prac­

titioners. The expense of the pursuit sometimes exceeded the value ot the

prize, and the fairest rights were abandoned by the poverty or prudence of the

claimants. Such costly justice might tend to abate the spirit of litigation,
but the

unequal pressure serves only to increase the influence of the rich, and to
aggravate

the misery of the poor. By these dilatory and expensive proceedings, the
wealthy

pleader obtains a more certain advantage than he could hope from the
accidental

corruption of his judge. The experience of an abuse, from which our own age

and country are not perfectly exempt, may sometimes provoke a generous indig­

nation, and extort the hasty wish of exchanging our elaborate jurisprudence
for

the simple and summary decrees of a Turkish cadhi. Our calmer reflection will

suggest, that such forms and delays are necessary to guard the person and pro­

perty of the citizen; that the discretion of the judge is the first engine of
tyranny,

and that the laws of a free people should foresee and determine every question
that

may probably arise in the exercise of power and the transactions of industry.

But the government of Justinian united the evils of liberty and servitude: and
the

Romans were oppressed at the same time by the multiplicity of their laws, and

the arbitrary will of their master.

CHAPTER XLV.

lieign, of the younger Justin.—Embassy of the .inars.—Their settlement on the
Danube.

—Conquest of Italy by the Lombards.—.adoption and reign of Tiberius.—Of Mau­

rice.—Stale of Italy under the Ijombards and exarchs.—Of Ravenna Distress of

Home.—Character and pontificate of Gregory I.

During the last years of Justinian, his infirm mind was devoted to heavenly

contemplation, and he neglected the business of the lower world. His subjects

were impatient of the long continuance of his life and reign: yet all who were
ca­

pable of reflection, apprehended the moment of his death, which might involve

the capital in tumult, and the empire in civil war. Seven nephews(l) of the

childish monarch, the sons or grandsons of his brother and sister, had been
edu­

cated in the splendour of a princely fortune; they had been shown in high com­

mands to the provinces and armies; their characters were known, their
followers

were zealous, and as the jealousy of age postponed the declaration of a
successor,

they might expect with equal hopes the inheritance of their uncle. He expired

in his palace after a reign of thirty-eight years; and the decisive
opportunity was

embraced by the friends of Justin,' the son"of Vigilantia.(2) At the hour of
mid-

(1) See the family of Justin and Justinian in the Fani'illse Bvzantime of
Ducaiure. p. 83—101. The devout

civilians LudewiWio Vil. Justinian, p. 131.) and Heineccius (Hist. Juris.
Koman. p. 574.) have since illustrated

the eenealofcy of their favourite prince. . .

(2) In the history of Justin's elevation, I have translated into simple and
concise ptojc, the eight hundred

Vol. III. 20

