OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

holy, holy. Lord God of Hosts! is supposed, by the Greeks, to be the identical

hymn which the angels and cherubim eternally repeat before the throne of

God, and which, about the middle of the fifth century, was miraculously
rerealed

to the church of Constantinople. The devotion of Antioch soon added, who was

crucifiedfor us! and this grateful address, either to Christ alone, or to the
whole

Trinity, may be justified by the rules of theology, and has been gradually
adopted

by the catholics of the east and west. But it had been imagined by a Monophy-

site bishop;(l) the gift of an enemy was at first rejected as a dire and
dangerous

blasphemy, and the rash innovation had nearly cost the emperor Anastasius his

throne and his life. (2)

The people of Constantinople were devoid of any rational principles of
freedom;

but they held as a lawful cause of rebellion, the colour of a livery in the
races, or

the colour of a mystery in the schools. The Trisagion, with and without this
ob­

noxious addition, was chanted in the cathedral by two adverse choirs, and,
when

their lungs were exhausted, they had recourse to the more solid arguments of

sticks and stones: the aggressors were punished by the emperor, and defended
by

the patriarch; and the crown and the mitre were staked on the event of this
mo­

mentous quarrel. The streets were instantly crowded with innumerable swarms

of men, women, and children; the legions of monks, in regular array, marched,

and shouted, and fought at their head,—" Christians! this is the day of
martyr­

dom; let us not desert our spiritual father; anathema to the Manichscan
tyrant; he

is unworthy to reign." Such was the catholic cry; and the galleys of
Anastasius

lay upon their oars before the palace, till the patriarch had pardoned his
penitent,

and hushed the waves of the troubled multitude. The triumph of Macedonius

was checked by a speedy exile; but the zeal of his flock was again exasperated

by the same question,— Whether one of the Trinity had been crucified? On this

momentous occasion, the blue and green factionsof Constantinople suspended
their

discord, and the civil and military powers were annihilated in their presence.
The

keys of the city, and the standards of their guards, were deposited in the
forum

of Constantine, the principal station and camp of the faithful. Day and night

they were incessantly busied either in singing hymns to the honour of their
god,

or in pillaging and murdering the servants of their prince. The head of his
fa­

vourite monk, the friend, as they styled him, of the enemy of the holy
Trinity,

was borne aloft on a spear; and the fire-brands, which had been darted against
he­

retical structures, diffused the undistinguishing flames against the most
orthodox

buildings. The statues of the emperor were broken, and his person was
concealed

in a suburb, till at the end of three days he dared to implore the mercy of
his sub­

jects. Without his diadem, and in the posture of a suppliant, Anastasius
appeared

on the throne of the circus. The catholics, before his face, rehearsed their
ge­

nuine Trisagion; they exulted in the offer which he proclaimed by the voice of

a herald, of abdicating the purple; they listened to the admonition, that
since all

could not reign, they should previously agree in the choice of a sovereign;
and

they accepted the blood of two unpopular ministers, whom their master without

hesitation, condemned to the lions. These furious but transient seditions were
en­

couraged by the success of Vitalian, who, with an army of Huns and Bulgarians,

for the most part idolaters, declared himself the champion of the catholic
faith.

In this pious rebellion he depopulated Thrace, besieged Constantinople,
extermi­

nated sixty-five thousand of his fellow-Christians, till he obtained the
recall of

the bishops, the satisfaction of the pope, and the establishment of the
council of

Chalcedon, an orthodox treaty, reluctantly signed by the dying Anastasius, and

more faithfully performed by the uncle of Justinian. And such was the event of

the first of the religious wars, which have been waged in the name and by the
dis­

ciples, of the God of Peace. (3)

(1) Peter Gnapheus, the fuller (a trade which he bad exercised in hia
monaitery.) patriarch of Antioch. His

tedious story is discussed in the Annals of Pagi, A. D. 477—490.) and a
dissertation of M. de Valois at the end i

of his Evagrius.

(2) The troubles under the reign of Anastasius must be gathered fi om the
chronicles of Victor, Marcellinus,

and Theophanes. As the last was not published in the time of Baronius, his
critic Fagi is more copious, u

well as more correct.

(3) The general history, from the council of Chalcedon to the death of
Anastasius, may be found in the

Breviary of Liberatus, (c. 14—19.) the second and third books of Evaerius, the
Abstract of the two book, of

Theodore the Reader, the Acts of th>- Synods, and the Epistles of the Popes.
(Conol. torn, v.) The series it

continued with some disorder in the fifteenth and sixteenth tomes of the
Memoires Ecclesiastiques of Tille-

mont. And here I must take leas'* for ever of that incomparable guide—whose
bigotryis overb&lanced by the

merits of tradition, diligence, veracity, and scrupulous minuteness. He was
prevented by death from'com-

pleting, as he designed, the sixth cenluiy of the church and enjph-e.

Vbr,. III. 28

