378 THE DECLINE AND FALL

and the caliph Moawiyah was invited by the cries of the Africans themselves.
Thtr

successors of Heraclius had been informed of the tribute which they had been
com­

pelled to stipulate with the Arabs: but instead of being moved to pity and
relieve

their distresses, they imposed, as an equivalent or a fine.sji second tribute
of a si­

milar amount. The ears of the Byzantine ministers were shut against the com­

plaints of their poverty and ruin: their despair was reduced to prefer the
domi­

nion of a single master; and the extortions of the patriarch of Carthage, who
was

invested with civil and military power, provoked the sectaries, and even the
ca­

tholics, of the Roman province to abjure the religion as well as the authority
of

their tyrants. The first lieutenant of Moawiyah acquired a just renown,
subdued

an important city, defeated an army of thirty thousand Greeks, swept away
four­

score thousand captives, anil enriched with their spoils the bold adventurers
of Sy­

ria and Egypt. (1) But the title of conqueror of Africa is more justly due to
his

successor Akbah. He marched from Damascus at the head of ten thousand of

the bravest Arabs: and the genuine force of the Moslems was enlarged by the

doubtful aid and conversion of many thousand barbarians. It would be
difficult,

nor is it necessary, to tiace the accurate line of the progress of Akbah. The
in­

terior regions have been peopled by tlve orientals with fictitious armies and
imagi­

nary citadels. In the warlike province of Zab or Numidia, fourscore thousand
of

the natives might assemble in arms; but the number of three hundred and sixty

towns is incompatible with the ignorance or decay of husbandry ;(2) and a
circum­

ference of three leagues will not be justified by the ruins of Erbe or
Lambesa, the

ancient metropolis of that inland country. As we approach the sea coast, the

well known cities of Bugia(3) and Tangier(4) define the more certain limits of
the

Saracen victories. A remnant of trade still adheres to the commodious harbour

of Bugia, which, in a more prosperous age, is said to have contained about
twenty

thousand houses; and the plenty of iron which is dug from the adjacent
mountains

might have supplied a braver people with the instruments of defence. The
remote

position and venerable antiquity of Tingi, or Tangier, have been decorated by
the

Greek and Arabian fables; but the figurative expressions of the latter, that
the

walls were constructed of brass, and that the roofs were covered with gold and
sil­

ver, may be interpreted as the emblems of strength and opulence. The province

of Mauritania Tingitana,(5) which assumed the name of the capital, had been
im­

perfectly discovered and settled by the Romans; the five colonies were
confined to

a narrow pale, and the more souchern parts were seldom explored except by the

agents of luxury, who searched the forests for ivory and citron-wood(6) and
the

shores of the ocean for the purple shell-fish. The fearless Akbah plunged into

the heart of the country, traversed the wilderness in which his successors
erected

the splendid capitals of Fez and Morocco(7) and at length penetrated to the
verge

of the Atlantic and the great desert. The river Suz descends from the western

sides of mount Atlas, fertilizes like the Nile, the adjacent soil, and falls
into the

sea at a moderate distance from the Canary, or Fortunate, islands. Its banks
were

inhabited by the last of the Moors, a race of savages, without laws, or
discipline,

or religion; they were astonished by the strange and irresistible terrors of
the ori­

ental arms; and, as they possessed neither gold nor silver, the richest spoil
was the

(1) Theophanes (in Chronograph, p. 2930 inserts the vague rumours that might
reach Constantinople, or tb«

western conquests of the Arabs; and 1 leain from Paul Warnefrid, deacon of
Aqnileia, (de Gestis Langobard,

lib. v. c. 15.) that at this time they sentn fleet from Alexandria into the
Silician and African seas.

(2) See Novairi (apud Otter, p. 118.) Leo Africanus, fol. 81. verso,) who
reckons only cinque citta e infinite

easai; Marmol, (Description de I'Afrique, torn. iii. p. 33.) and Shaw,
(Travels, p. 57. 65—68.)

(3) Leo African, fol. 38. verso, 59. recto. Marmol^tom. ii. p. 415. Shaw**p.
43.

(4) Leo African.fol. 52. Marmol, torn. ii. p. 228.

(5) Regio ignobilis, ct vis. quicqnam illustre sortita, parvis oppidis
habitatur, parva flumina emiltit, solo

ciuam viris melior, et segniti- gentis obscura. Pomponius Mela, l. 5.3.10.
Mela deserves the more credit,

since his own Phoenician anct stors had miexntecl from Tiugitana to Spain.
(See in 2. 6. a passage of that geo­

grapher so cruelly tortured h\ Stlmasius. I*a.v.- Vossius, and the most
virulent of critics, .Tames (rronovins.) He

Jived at the time of the final reduction of that country by the emperor
Claudius; yet almost tiiirty years after­

ward, Pliny (Hist. Nat. 5.1.) complains of hi. authors, too lazv to inquire,
too proud to confess their ignorance

of that wild and remote province.

(6) The foolish fashion of this citron-wood prevailed at Rome among the men,
as much as the taste for pearls

among the women. A round hoard or tabli-. four or five fret in diameter, sold
for the price of an estate (lati-

fundii taxatione.) eight, ten. or twelve thousand pounds sterling. (Plin.
Hist. Natur. 13. 29.) I conceive that I

must not confound the tree citrut with that of the fruit citrum. But lam not
botanist enough to define the former

(it is like the wild cypress) by the vulgar or Limueftn name; nor will I
decide whether the citrum be the onuiKe

or the lemon. Salmasiusnpprart to exhaust the subject, but he too involves
himself in the web of his disorderly

erudition. (Plinian. Exercitat. torn. ii. p.66r), &c.)

(7) Leo African, fol. 16, verso. Marmol, torn. ii. p. 28. This province, the
first scene of the exploits and

greatness of the cJeri^i, isofttu mentioned in the curious history ot'that
dynasty at the end of tbe third volume

of Marmol, Description de I'Afrique. The third vol. of the Recherches
irtitoriuo.es sur les Maures (lately pub­

lished at Paris,) illustrates the history and geography of the kingdom of Fez
and Morocco.

