lib THE DECLINE AKD FALL

The philosophy of Bayle dispelled a prejudice which Milton's muse had so re­

cently adornei}, that the comet, from its horrid hair, skakes pestilence and
roar.(l)

Its road in the heavens was observed with exquisite skill by Flamstead and
Cas-

sini; and the mathematical science of Bernoulli, Newton, and Halley, -investi-
p

gated the laws of its revolutions. At the eighth period, in the year 2255,
their

calculations may perhaps be verified by the astronomers of some future capital
id

the Siberian or American wilderness.

II. The near approach of a comet may injure or destroy the globe which we in­

habit; but the changes on its surface have been hitherto produced by the
action of

volcanoes and earthquakes. (2) The nature of the soil may indicate the
countries

most exposed to these formidable concussions, since they are caused by
subterra­

neous fires, and such fires are kindled by the union and fermentation of iron
and

sulphur. But their times and effects appear to lie beyond the reach of human
cu­

riosity, and the philosopher will discreetly abstain from the prediction of
earth­

quakes, till he has counted the drops of water that silently filtrate on the
inflam­

mable mineral, and measured the caverns which increase by resistance the
explo­

sion of the imprisoned air. Without assigning the cause, history will
distinguish

the periods in which these calamitous events have been rare or trequent, and
will

observe that this fever of the earth raged with uncommon violence during the

reign of Justinian. (3) Each year is marked by the repetition of earthquakes,
of

such duration that Constantinople has been shaken above forty days; of such
ex­

tent that the shock has been communicated to the whole surface of the globe,
or

at least of the Roman empire. An impulse or vibratory motion was felt;
enormous

chasms were opened, huge and heavy bodies were discharged into the air, the
sea

alternately advanced and retreated beyond its ordinary bounds, and a mountain
was

torn from Libanus,(4) and cast into the waves, where it protected, as a mole,
the

new harbour of Botrys(5) in Phoenicia. The stroke that agitates an ant-hill,
may

crush the insect myriads in the dust; yet truth must extort a confession, that
man

has industriously laboured for his own destruction. The institution of great
cities,

which include a nation within the limits of a wall, almost realizes the wish
of Ca­

ligula, that the Roman people had but one neck. Two hundred and fifty thousand

pel-sons are said to have perished in the earthquake of Antioch, whose
domestic

multitudes were swelled by the conflux of strangers to the festival of the
Ascen­

sion. The loss of Bcrytus(6) was of smaller account but of much greater value.

That city, on the coast of Phoenicia, was illustrated by the study of the
civil law,

■which opened the surest road to wealth and dignity: the schools of Berytus
were

filled with the rising spirits of the age, and many a youth was lost in the
earthquake,

who might have lived to be the scourge or the guardian of his country. In
these

disasters, the architect becomes the enemy of mankind. The hut of a savage, or

the tent of an Arab, may be thrown down without injury to the inhabitant; and
the

Peruvians had reason to deride the folly of their Spanish conquerors, who with
so

much cost and labour erected their own sepulchres. The rich marbles of a
patri­

cian are dashed on his own head: a whole people is buried under the ruins of

public and private edifices, and the conflagration is kindled and propagated
by the

innumerable fires which are necessary for the subsistence and manufactures of
a

great<city. Instead of the mutual sympathy which might comfort and assist the

distressed, they dreadfully experience the vices and passions which are
released

from the fear of punishment; the tottering houses are pillaged by intrepid
avarice;

ancients in their idolatry. Bernoulli, (Bee his Elogc, in Fontenelle, torn. v.
p. 99.) was forced to allow that the

tail, though not the head, was a sign of the wrath of God.

(1) ParadisC Lost was published in the year 1667. and the famous lines (lib.
ii. 70S. Sec.) which startled the

licenser, may allude to the recent comet of 1664, observed by Cassini at Rome,
in the presence of queen Chris-

liana. (Fontenelle, in his Etogc, torn. v. p. 338.) Had Charles II. betrayed
any symptoms of curiosity or fear?

(2) For the cause of earthquakes, see Buffon, torn. i. p. 502—536. Supplement
a I'Hist. Naturelle, torn. v.

p. 382—390. edition in 4tn.) Valmont de Bomare(Dictionaired'Histoire
Naturelle, Trembtcment dc Terre, Py­

rites) Watson; Chemical Essays, torn. i. p. 181—200.)

(3) The earthquakes that shook the Roman world in the reign of Justinian, are
described or mentioned by

Procopius, (Goth. lib. iv. e. 24. Anecdot. c. 18.) Agathias, lib. ii. p.
52—54. lib. v. p. 145—152, John Malala,

(Chron. torn. ii. p. 140—146. 176, 177. 183. 193.220.229.231. 233,234.) and
Theophanes (p. 151. 183. 189. 191—

196.)

(4) An abrupt height, a perpendicular cape between Aradus and Botrys, named by
the Greeks 8s*r *f*Tm-x»*

and fyirpoa-awov or /.iSawpio-^wov, by the scrupulous Christians. (Polyb. lib.
v. p. 411. Pompon. Mela, lib. i. c. 13.

p. 87.) cum Isaac Voss. Ohservat. Maundrell. Journey, p. 32,33. Pocock's
l>escription, vol. 2. p. 99.

(5) Bo'rys was founded (ami. ante Christ. 935—903.) by Ithobal, kins of Tyre.
(Marsham. Canon. Chron.

p. 387,388.) Its poor representative, the village of Patrone, is now destitute
of a harbour.

(6) The university, splendour, and ruin of Berytus, are celebrated by
Heineccius, (p. 351—356.) as an essen­

tial part of the history of the Roman law. It was overthrown in the twenty-
fifth year of Justinian, A. D. 551,

July 9; (Theophanes, p. 192.) but Agathias (lib. ii. p. Jl, 52.) suspends the
earthquake till he has achieved she

