122 THE DECLINE AND FALL

which so long maintained the integrity of his republic. A Locrian, who
proposed

any new law, stood forth in the assembly of the people with a cord round his
neck,

and if the law was rejected the innovator was instantly strangled.

The decemvirs, had been named, and their tables were approved, bv an assem­

bly of the centuries, in which riches preponderated against numbers. To the
first

class of Romans, the proprietors of one hundred thousand pounds of copper,(l)

ninety-eight votes were assigned, and only ninety-five were left for the six
inferior

classes, distributed according to their substance by the artful policy of
Servius.

But the tribunes soon established a more specious and popular maxim, that
every

citizen has an equal right to enact the laws which lie is bound to obey.
Instead

of the centuries, they convened the tribes, and the patricians, after an
important

struggle, submitted to the decrees of an assembly, in which their votes were
con­

founded with those of the meanest plebeians. Yet as long as the tribes succes­

sively passed over narrow bridges, (2) and gave their voices aloud, the
conduct of

each citizen was exposed to the eyes and ears of his friends and countrymen..

The insolvent debtor consulted the wishes of his creditor: the client would
have

blushed to oppose the views of his patron: the general was followed by his
vete­

rans, and the aspect of the grave magistrate was a living lesson to the
multitude.

A new method of secret ballot abolished the influence of fear and shame, of
ho­

nour and interest, and the abuse of freedom accelerated the progress of
anarchy

and despotism-(3) The Romans had aspired to be equal; they were levelled by

the equality of servitude; and the dictates of Augustus were patiently
ratified by

the formal consent of the tribes of centuries. Once, and once only, he experi­

enced a sincere and strenuous opposition. His subjects had resigned all
political

liberty; they defended the freedom of domestic life. A law which enforced the

obligation, and strengthened the bonds of marriage, was clamorously rejected;

Propertius, in the arms of Delia, applauded the victory of licentious love;
and

the project of reform was suspended till a new and more tractable generation
had

arisen in the world. (4) Such an example was not necessary to instruct a
prudent

usurper, of the mischief of popular assemblies; and their abolition, which Au­

gustus had silently prepared, was accomplished without resistance, and almost

without notice, on the accession of his successor. (5) Sixty thousand plebeian
leg­

islators, whom numbers made formidable, and poverty secure, were supplanted

by six hundred senators, who held their honours, their fortunes and their
lives,

by the clemency of the emperor. The loss of executive power was alleviated by

the gift of legislative authority; and Ulpian might assert, after the practice
of two

hundred years, that the decrees of the senate obtained the force and validity
of

laws. In the times of freedom, the resolves of the people had often been
dittated

by the passion or error of moment; the Cornelian, Pompeian, and Julian laws,

were adapted by a single hand to the prevailing disorders: but the senate,
under

the reign of the Cxsars, was composed of magistrates and lawyers, and in ques­

tions of private jurisprudence, the integrity of their judgment was seldom
pervert­

ed by fear or interest. (6)

The silence or ambiguity of the laws was supplied by the occasional edicts of

those magistrates who were invested with the honours of the state. (7) This
an.-

fi) Dionysim. with Arbuthuot, and most of the moderns (except Eisentchmidt de
Ponderibus, &e. p. 137—

340.,) represent the one hundred thousand asses by ten thousand Attic
drachmae, or somewhat more than three

hundred pounds sterling. But their calculation can apply only to the latter
times, when the as was dimi­

nished to one-twenty-fourih of its ancient weight; nor can I believe that in
the first ages, however destitute of

the precious metals, a single ounce of silver could hare been exchanged for
seventy pounds of copper or brass.

A more simple and rational method is, to value the eopper itself according to
the present rate, and, after com­

paring the mint and the market price, the Roman and avoirdupois weight, the
primitive as or Roman pound

of copper may be appreciated at one English shilling, and the one hundred
thousand asses of the first class

amounted to five thousand pounds sterling. It will appear from the same
reckoning, that an ox was sold at

Rome for SI. a sheep for Km-., and a quarter of wheat for It. 10*. (Kestus, p.
330.edit. Daeier. Plin. Hist. Na-

tur. xviii. 4..) nor do I se« any reason to reject these consequences, which
moderate our ideas of the poverty of

the first Romans.

(3) Consult the common writers on the Roman Comitia, especially Sigonius and
Beaufort. Spanheim (de

Przslantia et Usu Numismatum, torn. li. dissert, x. p. 192,193.) shows, on a
curious medal, the Cista, Ponies,

Septa, Diribitor. &c.

(3) Cicero (de Legibus, iii. 10—18.) debates this constitutional question, and
assigns to his brother Quintua

the most unpopular side.

(4) Prse tumultu recusantium perferre non potui (Sueton. in August, c. xxxiv.)
See Propertius, lib. ii. eleg.

\i. Heiueccius, in a separate history, has exhausted the whole subject of the
Julian and Papian-Poppsean

laws (Opp. torn. vii. P. 1. p. 1—479.)

(5) Tacit. Annul. 1.15. Lipsius, Excursus E. iu Taciturn.

(6) Non ambigitur senatum jus facere posse, is the decision of Ulpian (lib.
xvi. ad Edict, in Pandect, lib. i.

tit.iii. leg. ix.) Pomponius taxes the eomitia of the people as a turoa
hominum (Pandect, lib. i. tit, ii. leg. ix.)

(?) The jus hononrium of the pretort and other magistrates is strictly defined
in the Latin text of the to­

