THE DECLINE AND FALL

be applied to the slaughter of unbelievers; and he piously laboured to
establish

with fire and sword the unity of the Christian faith.(l)

With these sentiments, it was incumbent on him, at least, to be always in the

right. In the first years of his administration, he signalized his zeal as the
disci­

ple and patron of orthodoxy: the reconciliation of the Greeks and Latins es­

tablished the tome of St. Leo, as the creed of the emperor and the empire; the

Nestorians and Eutychians were exposed, on either side, to the double edge of

persecution; and the four synods of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and
Chalcedony

■were ratified by the code of a catholic lawgiver. (2) But while Justinian
strove to

maintain the uniformity of faith and worship, his wife Theodora, whose vices

were not incompatible with devotion, had listened to the Monophysite teachers;

and the open or clandestine enemies of the church revived and multiplied at
the

smile of their gracious patroness. The capital, the palace, the nuptial bed,
were

torn by spiritual discord: yet so doubtful was the sincerity of the royal
consorts,

that their seeming disagreement was imputed by many to a secret and
mischievous

confederacy against the religion and happiness of their people. (3) The famous

dispute of the three chapters,(4) which has filled more volumes than it de­

serves lines, is deeply marked with this subtle and disingenuous spirit. It
was

now three hundred years since the body of Origen(5) had been eaten by the

worms: his soul, of which he held the pre-existence, was in the hands of its
Cre­

ator, but his writings were eagerly perused by the monks of Palestine. In
these

writings, the piercing eye of Justinian descried more than ten metaphysical
errors;

and the primitive doctor, in the company of Pythagoras and Plato, was devoted

by the clergy to the eternity of hell-fire, which he had presumed to deny.
Under

the cover of this precedent, a treacherous blow was aimed at the council of

Chalcedon. The fathers had listened without impatience to the praise of Theo­

dore of Mopsuestia;(6) and their justice or indulgence had restored both Theo-

doret of Cyrrhus, and Ibas of Edessa, to the communion of the church. But the

characters of these oriental bishops were tainted with the reproach of heresy;
the

first had been the master, the two others were the friends of Nestorius: their
most

suspicious passages were accused under the title of the three chapters; and
the

condemnation of their memory must involve the honour of a synod, whose name
was

pronounced with sincere or affected reverence by the catholic world. If these

bishops, whether innocent or guilty, were annihilated in the sleep of death,
they

would not probably be awakened by the clamour, which after a hundred years

was raised over their grave. If they were already in the fangs of the demon,

their torments could neither be aggravated nor assuaged by human industry. If

in the company of saints and angels they enjoyed the rewards of piety, they
must

have smiled at the idle fury of the theological insects who still crawled on
the

surface of the earth. The foremost of these insects, the emperor of the
Romans,

darted his sting, and distilled his venom, perhaps without discerning the true
mo­

tives of Theodora and her ecclesiastical faction. The victims were no longer

subject to his power, and the vehement style nf his edicts could only proclaim

their damnation, and invite.the clergy of the east to join in a full chorus of
curses

and anathemas. The east, with some hesitation, consented to the voice of her

sovereign.- the fifth general council, of three patriarchs and one hundred and
sixty-

five bishops, was held at Constantinople; and the authors as well as the
defenders,

(1) The expression of Procopius is remarkable: co yap ot $Soxai e>ovi;
utGpwrmv f*vai, wye p* r*; kutou Josh;

TtA-nmoms rvjgotiv ovrtg. Anecdot. c. 13.

(2) See the Chronicle of Victor, p. 328, and the original evidence of the lavs
of Justinian. During the first

years of his reign, Baronius himself is in extreme good humour with the
emperor, who courted the popes,

till he got them into bis power.

(3) Procopius, Anecdot. e. 13. Evagrius, lib. iv. c. 10. If the ecclesiastical
never read the sacred historian,

their common suspicion proves at least the general hatred.

(4) On the subject of the three chapters, the original acts of the fifth
general council of Constantinople

supply much useless though authentic knowledge. (Concil. torn. vi. p. t—419.)
The Greek Evagrius is less

copious and correct (lib. iv. c. 38.) than the three zealous Africans,
Facundus, (in his twelve books de tribus

tapitutca, which are most enrrectly published by Sirmond) Liberatus, (in his
Breviarum, c. 22—24.) and Victor

Tunnensis in his Chronicle, (m torn, i. Antiq. Lect. Canisii. p. 330—S34.) The
Liber Pontificalis, or Anasta-

sius (in Vigilio, Pelagio, &c.) is original Italian evidence. The modern
reader will derive lorae information

from Dupin (Bibliot, Eccles. torn. v. p. 189—207.) and Basnage; (Hist, de
1'Eglise, torn. i. p. 519—541.( yet the

latter is too firmly resolved to depreciate the authority and character of the
pones.

(5) Ongen had indeed too great a propensity to imitate the irt.au and
fu«ri6ii« of the old philosophers.

(Justinian ad Mennam, in Concil. torn. vi. p. 356.) His moderate opinions were
too repugnant to the zeal of

the church, and he was found guilty of the heresy of reason.

(8) Basnage (Prefat. p. 11—14. ad torn. i. Antiq. Lect. Canis.) has fairly
weighed the guilt and innocence of

ineoaoreot Mopinestia. If he composed ten thousand volumes, as many errors
would be a charitable al­

lowance. In all the subsequent catalogues of heresiarchs, he alone, without
his two brethren, is ' " ' '

and it is the duty of Aiseman (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 203—207.) to
justify the sentence.

