OF" THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

founded on the slight and suspicious evidence of a child or a servant; the
guilt of

the green faction, of the rich, and of the enemies of Theodora, was presumed
by

the judges, and pederasty became the crime of those to whom no crime could be

imputed. A French philosopher(l) has dared to remark, that whatever is secret

must be doubtful, and that our natural horror of vice may abused as an engine
of

tyranny. But the favourable pursuasion of the same writer, that a legislator
may

confide in the taste and reason of mankind, is impeached by the unwelcome
disco-

very of the antiquity and extent of the disease. (2)

The free citizens of Athens and Rome enjoyed, in all criminal cases, the
invaluable

privilege of being tried by their country. (3) 1. The administration of
justice is the

most ancient office of a prince: it was exercised by the Roman kings, and
abused

by Tarquin; who alone, without law or council, pronounced his arbitrary judg­

ments. The first consuls succeeded to this regal prerogative; but the sacred
right

of appeal soon abolished the jurisdiction of the magistrates, and all public
causes

were decided by the supreme tribunal of the people. But a wild democracy, su­

perior to the forms, too often disdains the essential principles of justice:
the pride

of despotism was envenomed by plebeian envy, and the neroes of Athens might

sometimes applaud the happiness of the Persian, whose fate depended on the ca­

price of a single tyrant. Some salutary restraints, imposed by the people on
their

own passions, were at once the cause and effect of the gravity and temperance
of

the Romans. The right of accusation was confined to the magistrates. A vote of
the

thirty-five tribes could inflict a fine: but the cognizance of all natural
crimes was re­

served by a fundamental law to the assembly of the centuries, in which the
weight of

influence and property was sure to preponderate. Repeated proclamations and
ad­

journments were interposed, to allow time for prejudice and resentment to
subside;

the whole proceeding might be annulled by a seasonable omen, or the opposition
of a

tribune; and such popular trials were commonly less formidable to innocence,
than

they were favourable to guilt. But this union of the judicial and legislative
powers,

left it doubtful whether the accused party was pardoned or acquitted; and in
the

defence of- an illustrious client, the orators of Rome and Athens addressed
their

arguments to the policy and benevolence, as well as to the justice of their
sove­

reign. 2. The task of convening the citizens for the trial of each offender
became

more difficult, as the citizens and the offenders continually multiplied; and
the rea­

dy expedient was adopted of delegating the jurisdiction of the people to the
ordi­

nary magistrates, or to extraordinary inquisitors. In the first ages these
ques­

tions were rare and occasional. In the beginning of the seventh century of
Roma

they were made perpetual; for pretors were annually expowered to sit in judg­

ment on the state offences of treason, extortion, peculation, and bribery; and
Syl-

la added new pretors and new questions for those crimes which more directly
in­

jure the safety of individuals. By these inquisitors the trial was prepared
and di­

rected; but they could only pronounce the sentence of the majority of judges,
who

with some truth, and more prejudice, have been compared to the English ju­

ries. (4) To discharge this important though burdensome office, an annual list
of

ancient and respectable citizens was formed by the pretor. After many
constitu­

tional struggles, they were chosen in equal numbers from the senate, the
eques­

trian order, and the people; four hundred and fifty were appointed for single
ques­

tions; and the various rolls or decuries of judges must have contained the
names

of some-thousand Romans, who represented the judicial authority of the state.
In

each particular cause, a sufficient number was drawn from the urn; their inte­

grity was guarded by an oath; the mode of ballot secured their independence;
the

suspicion of partiality was removed by the mutual challenges of the accuser
and

(1) Montesquieu^ Esprit des Lois, lib. xii. c. 6. That eloquent philosopher
conciliates the rights of liberty

and of nature, which should- never be placed in opposition to each other.

(2) For the corruption of Palestine, two thousand years before the Christian
era, see the history and laws of

Moses. Ancient Gaul is stigmatized by Diodonts Siculus (torn. i. lib. v. p.
356..) China by the Mahometan

and Christian travellers (Ancient Relationes of India and China, p. 34.
translated by Renaudot,and his bitter

critic the Pere Premare, Lettres Edifiantes, torn. six. p. 435.) and native
America by the Spanish historians

(Garciluuso de la Vega, lib. iii. c. 13. Rycant's translation, and Dictionaire
dc Bayle. torn. iii. p. 88.) I believe,

and hope, that the negroes, in their own country, were exempt from this moral
pestilence.

(3) The important subject of the public questions and judgments at Rome is
explained with much learn­

ing, and in a classic style, by Charles Sigonius (lib. iii. de Judiciis, in
Opp. torn. iii. 679—3fi t..) and a good

abridgment may be found in the Repuhlique Romain*e of Beaufort (torn. ii. lib.
v. p. 1—121.) Those who wish

for more abstruse law, may study Noodt (de Jurisdictioue et ImperioLibri duo,
torn. p. 93—144..) Heineccius,

(ad Pandect, lib. i. et ii. ad Institut. lib. iv. tit. 17. Element, ad
Antiquitat.) and Gravina (Opp. 230—251.)

(4) The office, both at Rome and in England, must be considered as an
occasional duty, and not a magis­

tracy or profession. But the obligation of a unanimous verdict is peculiar to
our laws, which condemn tbx.

jurymen to undergo the torture from whence they have exempted the criminal,

