264 THE DECLINE AND FALL

and shared with a smile the abstinence or diet of the camp. No sooner did he
re­

turn to Constantinople, than he resigned himself to the arts and pleasures of
a life

of luxury: the expense of his dress, his table, and his palace, surpassed the
mea­

sure of his predecessors, and whole summer days, were idly wasted in the
delicious

isles of the Propontis, in the incestuous love of his niece Theodora. The
double

coast of a warlike and dissolute prince, exhausted the revenue, and multiplied

the taxes; and Manuel, in the distress of his last Turkish camp, endured a
bitter

reproach from the mouth of a desperate soldier. As he quenched his thirst, he

complained that the water of a fountain was mingled with Christian blood. " It
is

not the first time" (exclaimed a voice from the crowd) " that you have drank,
O

emperor! the blood of your Christian subjects." Manuel Comnenus was twice

married; to the virtuous Bertha or Irene of Germany, and to the beauteous
Maria,

a French or Latin princess of Antioch. The only daughter of his first wife
destined

for Bela, a Hungarian prince, who was educated at Constantinople under the
name

of Alexius; and the consummation of their nuptials might have transferred the

Roman sceptre to a race of free and warlike barbarians. But as soon as Maria
of

Antioch had given a son and heir to the empire, the presumptive rights of Bela

were abolished, and he was deprived of his promised bride: but the Hungarian

prince resumed his name and the kingdom of his fathers, and displayed such
vir­

tues as might excite the regret and envy of the Greeks. The son of Maria was

named Alexius; and at the age of ten years, he ascended the Byzantine throne,

after his father's decease had closed the glories of the Comnenian line.

The fraternal concord of the two sons of the great Alexius, had been sometimes

clouded by an opposition of interest and passion. By ambition, Isaac the
Sebasto-

crator was excited to flight and rebellion, from whence he was reclaimed by
the

firmness and clemency of John the Handsome. The errors of Isaac, the father of

the emperors of Trebizond, were short and venial; but John the elder of his
sons,

renounced for ever his religion. Provoked by a real or imaginary insult of his

uncle, he escaped from the Roman to the Turkish camp: his apostacy was re­

warded with the sultan's daughter, the title of Chelebi, or noble, and the
inheri­

tance of a princely estate; and in the fifteenth century Mahomet II. boasted
of his

imperial descent from the Comnenian family. Andronicus, the younger brother of

John, son of Isaac, and grandson of Alexius Comnenus, is one of the most
conspi­

cuous characters of the age: and his genuine adventures might form the subject
of

a very singular romance. To justify the choice of three ladies of royal birth,
it is

incumbent on me to observe, that their fortunate lover was cast in the best
pro­

portions of strength and beauty; and that the want of the softer graces was
supplied

by a manly countenance, a lofty stature, athletic muscles, and the air and
deport­

ment of a soldier. The preservation, in his old age, of health and vigour, was
the

reward of temperance and exercise. A piece of bread and a draught of water
were

often his sole and evening repast; and if he tasted of a wild boar, or a stag,
which

he had roasted with his own hands, it was the well-earned fruit of a laborious
chase.

Dexterous in arms, he was ignorant of fear: his persuasive eloquence could
bend to

every situation and character of life: his style, though not his practice, was
fashioned

by the example of St. Paul; and, in every deed of mischief, he had a heart to
re­

solve, a head to contrive, and a hand to execute. In his youth, after the
death of

the emperor John, he followed the retreat of the Roman army; but in the march

through Asia Minor, design or accident tempted him to wander into the
mountains:

the hunter was encompassed by the Turkish huntsmen, and he remained some

time a reluctant or willing captive in the power of the sultan. His virtues
and

vices recommended him to the favour of his cousin; he shared the perils and
the

pleasures of Manuel; and while the emperor lived in public incest with his
niece

Theodora, the affections of her sister Eudocia were seduced and enjoyed by An­

dronicus. Above the decencies, of her sex and rank, she gloried in the name of
his

concubine; and both the palace and the camp could witness that she slept or

watched in the arms of her lover. She accompanied him to his military command

of Cilicia, the first scene of his valour and imprudence. He pressed, with
active

ardour, the siege of Mopsuestia: the day was employed in the boldest attacks;
but

the night was wasted in song and dance; and a band of Greek comedians formed

the choicest part of his retinue. Andronicus was surprised by the sally of a
vigi­

lant foe: but while his troops fled in disorder, his invincible lance
transpierced the

thickest ranks of the Armenians. On his return to the imperial camp in Mace­

donia, he was received by Manuel with public smiles and a private reproof; but

the duchies of Naissus, Braniscba, and Castoria, were the reward or
consolation 01

