OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 177

fate of his father, to confine the traitors who had been released from their
chains,

to deposite in some holy place the diadem which he had usurped, and to accept

from his gracious benefactor the pardon of his faults and the government of a
pro­

vince. The rebel might not be proud, and the king most assuredly was not hum­

ble; but the one was conscious of his strength, and the other was sensible of
his

weakness; and even the modest language of his reply still left room for treaty
and

reconciliation. Chosroes led into the field the slaves of the palace and the
popu­

lace of the capital: they beheld with terror the banners of a veteran army;
they

were encompassed and surprised by the evolutions of the general; and the
satraps

who had deposed Hormouz, received the punishment of their revolt, or expiated

their first treason by a second and more criminal act of disloyalty. The life
and

liberty of Chosroes were saved, but he was reduced to the necessity of
imploring

aid or refuge in some foreign land: and the implacable Bindoes, anxious to
secure

an unquestionable title, hastily returned to the palace, and ended with a bow-
string,

the wretched existence of the son of Nushirvan.(l)

While Chosroes despatched the preparations of his retreat, he deliberated with

his remaining friends, (2) whether he should lurk in the valleys of mount
Cauca­

sus, or fly to the tents of the Turks, or solicit the protection of the
emperor. The

long emulation of the successors of Artaxerxes and Constantine increased his
re­

luctance to appear as a suppliant in a rival court; but he weighed the forces
of the

Romans, and prudently considered, that the neighbourhood of Syria would render

his escape more easy, and the more effectual. Attended only by his concubines,

and a troop of thirty guards, he secretly departed from the capital, followed
the

banks of the Euphrates, traversed the desert, and hatted at the distance of
ten

miles from Circesium. About the third watch of the night, the Roman prefect

was informed of his approach, and he introduced the royal stranger to the
fortress

at the dawn of day. From thence the king of Persia was conducted to the more

honourable residence of Hierapolis; and Maurice dissembled his pride, and dis­

played his benevolence, at the reception of the letters and ambassadors of the

grandson of Nushirvan. They humbly represented the vicissitudes of fortune and

the common interest of princes, exaggerated the ingratitude of Bahram, the
agent

of the evil principle, and urged, with specious argument, that it was for the
ad­

vantage of the Romans themselves to support the two monarchies which balance

the world, the two great luminaries by whose salutary influence it is vivified
and

adorned. The anxiety of Chosroes was soon relieved by the assurance, that the

emperor had espoused the cause of justice and royalty; but Maurice prudently
de;

clined the expense and delay of his useless visit to Constantinople. In the
name

of his generous benefactor, a rich diadem was presented to the fugitive prince

with an inestimable gift of jewels and gold; a powerful army was assembled on
the

frontiers of Syria and Armenia under the command of the valiant and faithful

Narses,{3) and this general, of his own nation, and his own choice, was
directed

to pass the Tigris, and never to sheathe his sword till he had restored Chos­

roes to the throne of his ancestors. The enterprise, however splendid, was

less arduous than it might appear. Persia had already repented of her fatal
rash­

ness, which betrayed the heir of the house of Sassantothe ambition of a
rebellious

subject; and the bold refusal of the Magi to consecrate his usurpation,
compelled

Bahram to assume the sceptre, regardless of the laws and prejudices of the
nation.

The palace was soon distracted with conspiracy, the city with tumult, the pro­

vinces with insurrection; and the cruel execution of the guilty and the
suspected,

served to irritate rather than subdue the public discontent. No sooner did the

grandson of Nushirvan display his own and the Roman banners beyond the Ti*

gris, than he was joined, each day, by the increasing multitudes of the
nobility

and people; and as he advanced, he received, from every side, the grateful
offer-

(1) Theophylact (lib. iv. c. 7.) imputes the death of Horraonr. to his son, hy
whose command he was beaten

to death with clubs. I hare followed the milder account of Khondemii' and
Eutychius, and shall always be

content with the slightest evidence to extenuate the crime of parricide.

(2) After the battle of Pharsalia, the Pompey of Luean (lib. Tiii. 256—455)
holds a similar debate. He was

himself desirous of seeking the Farthians; but his companions abhorred the
unnatural alliance; and the ad­

verse prejudices miii;ht operate as forcibly on Chosroes and bis companions,
who could describe, with the

same vehemence, the contrast of laws, religion, and manners, between the east
and west.

(3) In this age there were three warriors of the name of Narses, who had been
often confounded. (Pagi,

Critica, torn. 11. p. 640.)—I. A Persarmenian, the brother of Isaac and
Armatius. who, after a successful ac­

tion against Belisarius. deserted from his Persian sovereign, and afterward
served in the Italian war. 2. The

eunuch who conquered Italy. 3. The restorer of Chosroes, who is celebrated in
the poem of Corippus (lib.

iii. 220—227.) as excelsus super omnia vertice agmina .... habitu modestus
morum probitatc piace'ni, virtuie

verendus; fulminetis, cautui, vigilans, &c.

Vol. III. 23

