OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

self in the use of a chair or pulpit of rough timber. (1) After a reign of six
years,

fifteen hundred Moslems, in arms and m the field, renewed their oath of
allegi­

ance; and their chief repeated the assurance of protection till the death of
the last

member, or the final dissolution of the party. It was in the same camp that
the

deputy of Mecca was astonished by the attention of the faithful to the words
and

looks of the prophet, by the eagerness with which they collected his spittle,
a

hair that dropped on the ground, the refuse water of his lustrations; as if
they

participated in some degree of the prophetic virtue. " I have seen (said he)
the

Chosroes of Persia and the Csesar of Rome, but never did I behold a king among

his subjects like Mahomet among his companions. The devout fervour of en­

thusiasm acts with more energy and truth than the cold and formal servility of

courts.

In the state of nature every man has a right to defend, by force of arms, his
per­

son and his possessions; to repel, or even to prevent, the violence of his
enemies,

and to extend his hostilities to a reasonable measure of satisfaction and
retaliation.

In the free society of the Arabs, the duties of subject and citizen imposed a
fee­

ble restraint; and Mahomet, in the exercise of a peaceful and benevolent
mission,

had been despoiled and banished by the injustice of his countrymen. The choice

of an independent people had exalted the fugitive of Mecca to the rank of a
so­

vereign: and he was invested with the just prerogative of forming alliances,
and

of waging offensive or defensive war. The imperfection of human rights was
sup­

plied and armed by the plenitude of divine power: the prophet of Medina
assumed,

in his new revelations, a fiercer and more sanguinary tone, which proves that
his

former moderation was the effect of weakness:(2) the means of persuasion had

been tried, the season of forbearance was elapsed, and he was now commanded to

propagate his religion by the (word, to destroy the monuments of idolatry,
and,

without regarding the sanctity of days or months, to pursue the unbelieving
nations

of the earth. The same bloody precepts, so repeatedly inculcated in the Koran,

are ascribed by the author to the Pentateuch and the gospel. But the mild
tenor

of the evangelic style may explain an ambiguous text, that Jesus did not bring

peace on the earth, but a sword: his patient and humble virtues should not be
con­

founded with the intolerant zeal of princes and bishops, who have disgraced
the

name of his disciples. In the prosepution of religious war, Mahomet might
appeal

with more propriety to the example of Moses, of the judges and the kings of
Israel.

The military laws of the Hebrews are still more rigid than those of the
Arabian

legislator. (3) The Lord of hosts marched in person before the Jews; if a city
re­

sisted their summons, the males, without distinction, were put to the sword:
the

seven nations of Canaan were devoted to destruction: and neither repentance
nor

conversion could shield them from the inevitable doom, that no creature within

their precincts should be left alive. The fair option of friendship, or
submission,

or battle, was proposed to the enemies of Mahomet. If they professed the creed

of Islam, they were admitted to all the temporal and spiritual benefits of his
pri­

mitive disciples, and marched under the same banner to extend the religion
which

they had emhraced. The clemency of the prophet was decided by his interest:
yet

he seldom trampled on a prostrate enemy: and he seems to promise, that on the
pay­

ment of a tribute, the least guilty of his unbelieving subjects might be
indulged in

their worship, or at least in their imperfect faith. In the first months of
his reign,

he practised the lessons of holy warfare, and displayed his white banner
before the

gates of Medina; the martial apostle fought in person at nine battles or
sieges;(4) and

fifty enterprises of war were achieved in ten years by himself or his
lieutenants. The

Arab continued to unite the professions of a merchant and a robber; and his
petty

. excursions for the defence or the attack of a caravan, insensibly prepared
his troops

for the conquest of Arabia. The distribution of the spoil was regulated by a
di-

(1) Al .Tannabi (apud Gagnier, torn. ii. p. 246, 321.) describes the seal and
pulpit, as two venerable relics of

the apostle of God; and the portrait of his aourt it taken from Abulfeda. (c
44. p. 85.)

(2) The eighth and ninth chapters of the Koran are the loudest and most
vehement; and Maracci (Prodro-

mus, part iv. p. 59—64. has inveighed with more justice than discretion
against the double dealing of the im­

postor.

(3) The tenth and twentieth chapters of Deuteronomy, with the practical
comments of Joshua. David, Etc.

are read with more awe than satisfaction by the pious Christians of the
present age. But the bishops, as well

as the rabbis of former times, have beat the drum-ecclesiastic with pleasure
and success. (SRle's Preliminary

Discourse, p. 142,143.)

(4) Abulfeda, in Vit. Moham. p. 156. The private arsenal of the apostle
consisted of nine swords, three lances

seven pikes or half pikes, a quiver and three bows, seven cuirasses, three
shields, and two helmets, (Gapnier.

torn. iii. p. 328—334.) with a large white standard, a black banner, (p. 335.)
twenty horses, (p. 322.) &c. Two of

his martial sayings are recorded bv tradition. (Gagnier. torn. ii. p. 83.
337.)

