382 THE DECLINE AND FALL

rope. A small portion of Mauritania was still wanting to the African conquest;

but Musa, in the pride of victory, was repulsed from the walls of Ceuta, by
the

vigilance and courage of count Julian, the general of the Goths. From his
disap­

pointment and perplexity, Musa was relieved by an unexpected message of the

Christian chief, who offered his place, his person, and his sword, to the
successors

of Mahomet, and solicited the disgraceful honour of introducing their arms
into the

heart of Spain. (1) If we inquire into the cause of his treachery, the
Spaniards

will repeat the popular story of his daughter Cava;(2) of a virgin who was se­

duced, or ravished, by her sovereign; of a father who sacrificed his religion
and

country to the thirst of revenge. The passions of princes have often been
licen­

tious and destructive; but this well-known tale, romantic in itself, is
indifferently

supported by external evidence; and the history of Spain will suggest some mo­

tives of interest and policy more congenial to the breast of a veteran
statesman. (3)

After the decease or deposition of Witiza, his two sons were supplanted by the

ambition of Roderic, a noble Goth, whose father, the duke or governor of a
pro­

vince, had fallen a victim to the preceding tyranny. The monarchy was still

elective; but the sons of Witiza, educated on the steps of the throne, were
impa­

tient of a private station. Their resentment was the more dangerous, as it was

varnished with the dissimulation of courts: their followers were excited by
the re­

membrance of favours and the promise of a revolution; and their uncle Oppas,

archbishop of Toledo and Seville, was the first person in the church, and the
se­

cond in the state. It was probable that Julian was involved in the disgrace of
the

unsuccessful faction; that he had little to hope and much to fear from the new

reign; and that the imprudent king could not forget or forgive the injuries
which

Roderic and his family had sustained. The merit and influence of the count
ren­

dered him a useful or formidable subject: his estates were ample, his
followers

bold and numerous, and it was too plainly shown that, by his Andalusian and
Mau-

ritanian commands, he held in his hands the keys of the Spanish monarchy. Too

feeble, however, to meet his sovereign in arms, he sought the aid of a foreign

power; and his rash invitation of the Moors and Arabs produced the calamities
of

eight hundred years. In his epistles, or in a personal interview, he revealed
the

wealth and nakedness of his country; the weakness of an unpopular prince; the

degeneracy of an effeminate people. The Goths were no longer the victorious

barbarians who had humbled the pride of Rome, despoiled the queen of nations,

and penetrated from the Danube to the Atlantic ocean. Secluded from the world

by the Pyrenean mountains, the successors of Alaric had slumbered in a long

peace; the walls of the cities were mouldered into dust; the youth had
abandoned

the exercise of arms; and the presumption of their ancient renown would expose

them in a field of battle to the first assault of the invaders. The ambitious
Sara­

cen was fired by the ease and importance of the attempt; but the execution was

delayed till he had consulted the commander of the faithful: and his messenger

returned with the permission of Walid to annex the unknown kingdoms of the

west to the religion and throne of the caliphs. In his residence of Tangier,
Musa,

with secrecy and caution, continued his correspondence and hastened his
prepara­

tions. But the remorse of the conspirators was soothed by the fallacious assu­

rance, that he should content himself with the glory and spoil, without
aspiring

to establish the Moslems beyond the sea that separates Africa from Europe. (4)

(1) The fall and resurrection of the Gothic monarchy are related by Mariana,
(torn, i. p. 238—260. lib. vi, c

19—26. lib. vii. c. 1,2.) That historian has infused into his noble work
(Historic de Rebus Hispanise, libii 30.

Hagae Comitura 1733, in four volumes in folio, with the Continuation of
Miniana) the style and spirit of a Ro­

man classic; and after the twelfth century, his knowledge and judgment may be
safely trusted. But the Jesuit

is not exempt from the prejudices of his order; he adopts and adorns, like his
rival Buchanan, the most absurd

of the national legends; he is too careless of criticism and chronology, and
supplies, from a lively fancy, the

chasms of historical evidence. These chasms are large and frequent; Roderic,
archbishop of Toledo, the fa­

ther of the Spanish history, lived five hundred years after the conquests of
the Arabs, ana the more early ac­

counts are comprised in some meagre lines of the blind chronicles of Isidore
of Badajoz (Pacensis,) and of Al-

phonso III. king of Leon, which I have seen only in the Annals of Pagi.

(2) Le viol fsays Voltaire) est aussi difficile a faire qu'a prouver. Des
Eveques se seroicnt ils lignes pour une

fille? (Hist. Generale, c. 26.) His argument is not logically conclusive.

(3) In the story of Cava-f)Ianana(fib.vi. c. 21. p. 241,242.) seems to vie
with the Lucretia of Livy. Like the

ancients, he seldom qimtes; and The oldest testimony of Baronius, (Anna!.
Eccles. A. D. 713, no. 19.) tharof

Lucas Tudensis, a Gallician deacon of the thirteenth century, only says Cava
quam pro concubina mebatur.

. (4) The orientals, Elmacin, Abulpharagius, Abulfeda, pass over the conquest
of Spain in silence, or with a

single word. The text of Norairi.and the other Arabian writers, is
represented, though with some foreign

alloy, by M. de Cardonne, (Hist, de PAf'rique etde l'Espagne sous la
Domination des A tabes, Paris. 1765, three

vols, in duodecimo, torn. i. p. 55—114.) and more concisely by M. de Guignes.
Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p. 347—

i • 7"'ie lilirarMul °f the Escurial has not satisfied my hopes: yet he
appears to have searched with diligence

bis broken materials; and the bistorv of the conquest is illustrated by some
valuable fragments of the crnuiDe

aazis, (who wrote at Corduba, A. H. 300.) of Ben Hazil, &C. See Bibliot.
Arabico-Hitpana, torn, ii. p. 32.10S.

