OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. i 1

tempted the female sex, though seldom seen in the circus, to espouse the
inclina­

tion of their lovers, or to contradict the wishes of their husbands. Every
law,

either human or divine, was trampled under foot, and as long as the party was

successful, its deluded followers appeared careless of private distress, or
public

calamity. The license, without the freedom of democracy, was revived at An-

tioch and Constantinople, and the support of a faction became necessary to
every

candidate for civil or ecclesiastical honours. A secret attachment to the
family

or sect of Anastasius was imputed to the greens; the blues were zealously
devoted

to the cause of orthodoxy and Justinian.(l) and their grateful patron
protected,

above five years, the disorders of a faction, whose seasonable tumults
overawed

the palace, the senate, and the capitals of the east. Insolent with royal
favour,

the blues affected to strike terror by a peculiar and barbaric dress; the long
hair

of the Huns, their close sleeves and ample garments, a lofty step, and a
sonorous

voice. In the day they concealed their two-edged poniards, but in the night

they boldly assembled in arms, and in numerous bands, prepared for every act
of

violence and rapine. Their adversaries of the green faction, or even
inoffensive

citizens, were stripped and often murdered by these nocturnal robbers, and it
be­

came dangerous to wear any gold buttons or girdles, or to appear at a late
hour

in the streets of a peaceful capital. A daring spirit, rising with impunity,
pro­

ceeded to violate the safeguard of private houses; and fire was employed to
faci­

litate the attack, or to conceal the crimes of those factious rioters. No
place

was safe or sacred from their depredations; to gratify either avarice or
revenge,

they profusely spilt the blood of the innocent: churches and altars were
polluted

by atrocious murders; and it was the boast of the assassins, that their
dexterity

couldalways inflict a mortal wound with a single stroke of their dagger. The

dissolute youth of Constantinople adopted the blue livery of disorder; the
laws

were silent, and the bonds of society were relaxed; creditors were compelled
to

resign their obligations; judges to reverse their sentence; masters to
enfranchise

their slaves; fathers to supply the extravagance of their children; noble
matrons

were prostituted%) the lust of their servants; beautiful boys were torn from
the

arms of their parettts; and wives, unless they preferred a voluntary death,
were

ravished in the presence of their husbands. (2) The despair of the greens, who

were persecuted by their enemies, and deserted by the magistrate, assumed the

privilege of defence, perhaps of retaliation: but those who survived the
combat

were dragged to execution, and the unhappy fugitives escaping to woods and ca­

verns, preyed without mercy on the society from whence they were expelled.

Those ministers of justice who had courage to punish the crimes, and to brave
the re­

sentment of the blues, became the victims of their indiscreet zeal: a prefect
of Con­

stantinople fled for refuge to the holy sepulchre; a count of the east was
ignomi-

niously whipped, and a governor of Cilicia was hanged, by the order of
Theodora,

on the tomb of two assassins whom he had condemned for the murder of his

groom, and a daring attack upon his own life. (3) An aspiring candidate may be

tempted to build his greatness on the public confusion, but it is the interest
as

well as duty of a sovereign to maintain the authority of the laws. The first
edict

of Justinian, which was often repeated, and sometimes executed, announced his

firm resolution to support the innocent, and to chastise the guiltv of every
denomi­

nation and colour. Yet the balance of justice was still inclined in favour of
the

blue faction, by the secret affection, the habits, and the fears of the
emperor; his

equity, after an apparent straggle, submitted, without reluctance, to the
implaca­

ble passions of Theodora, and the empress never forgot, or forgave, the
injuries

of the comedian. At the accession of the younger Justin, the proclamation of

equal and rigorous justice indirectly condemned the partiality of the former
reigns.

" Ye blues, Justinian is no more! ye greens, he is still alive!"(4)

A sedition, which almost laid Constantinople in ashes, was excited by the mu­

tual hatred and momentary reconciliation of the two factions. In the fifth
year

of his reign, Justinian celebrated the festival of the ides of January: the
games

CO The partiality of Justinian for the blues, (Aneedot. c. 7.) is attested by
Evae;rim, (Hist. Eceles. lib. iv. c.

32.) John Malala, (torn. ii. p. 138.139.) especially for Antioch; and
Theoplianes. (p. 143.)

(2) A wile, (says Procopius) who was seized and almost ravished by a blae
coat, threw herself into the Bos-

phorus. The bishops of the second Syria, (Aleman. p. 26.) deplore a similar
suicide, the guilt or glory of fe­

male chastity, and name the heroine.

(3) Ttte doubtful credit of Procopius, (Aneedot. c. xvii.) is supported by the
less partial Kvafrrins, who eun-

fi rras the fact, and specifies the names. The tragic fate of the prefect of
Constantinople, Is related by John

Malala. (torn. ii. p. 139.)

(4) See John Malala; (tom.ii. p. 147.) yet he owns that Justinian was attached
to the blues. The. seeming

discord of the emperor and Theodora, is perhaps viewed with too macta jealousy
and refinement by Proco­

pius. (Aneedot. «. i.) See AJernan. Pi acfat. p. 6.

