THE DECLINE AND FALL

rou led the van at the head of nine thousand horse: the bands of the Saracens
suc­

ceeded each other in formidable review; and the rear was closed by Caled in
per­

son, with the standard of the black eagle. To the activity of Derar he
intrusted

the commission of patroling round the city with two thousand horse, of
scouring

the plain, and of intercepting all succour or intelligence. The rest of the
Arabian

chiefs were fixed in their respective stations before the seven gates of
Damascus;

and the siege was renewed with fresh vigour and confidence. The art, the
labour,

the military engines of the Greeks and Romans, are seldom to be found in the

simple, though successful operations of the Saracens: it was sufficient for
them to

invest a city with arms, rather than with trenches; to repel the sallied of
the be­

sieged; to attempt a stratagem or an assault; or to expect the progress of
famine

and discontent Damascus would have acquiesced in the trial of Aiznadin, as a

final and peremptory sentence between the emperor and the caliph; her courage

was rekindled by the example and the authority of Thomas, a noble Greek, il­

lustrious in a private condition by the alliance of Heraclius.(l) The tumult
and

illumination of the night proclaimed the design of the morning sally; and the

Christian hero, who affected to despise the enthusiasm of the Arabs, employed

the general resource of a similar superstition. At the principal gate, in the
sight

of both armies, a lofty crucifix was erected; the bishop, with his clergy,
accom­

panied the march, and laid the volume of the New Testament before the image

of Jesus; and the contending parties were scandalized or edified by a prayer,
that

the Son of God would defend his servants and vindicate his truth. The battle

raged with incessant fury; and the dexterity of Thomas,(2) an incomparable
archer,

was fatal to the boldest Saracens, till their death was revenged by a female
heroine,

the wife of Aban, who had followed him to the holy war, embraced her expiring

husband. " Happy," said she, "happy art thou, my dear: thou art gone to thy

Lord who first joined us together, and then parted us asunder. I will revenge
thy

death, and endeavour to the utmost of my power to come to the place where thou

art, because I love thee. Henceforth* shall no man ever touch me more, for I
have

dedicated myself to the service of God." Without a groan, without a tear, she

washed the corpse of her husband, and buried him with the usual rites. Then

grasping the manly weapons, which, in her native land, she was accustomed to

wield, the intrepid widow of Aban sought the place where his murderer fought
in

the thickest of the battle. Her first arrow pierced the hand of his standard-
bear­

er: her second wounded Thomas in the eye; and the fainting Christians no
longer

beheld their ensign or their leader. Yet the generous champion of Damascus re­

fused to withdraw to his palace: his wound was dressed on the rampart; the
fight

was continued till the evening; and the Syrians rested on their arms. In the
si­

lence of the night, the signal was given by a stroke on the great bell; the
gates

were thrown open, and each gate discharged an impetuous column on the sleeping

camp of the Saracens. Caled was the first in arms; at the head of four hundred

horse he flew to the post of danger, and the tears trickled down his iron
cheeks,

as he uttered a fervent ejaculation: "O God! who never sleepest, look upon thy

servants, and do not deliver them into the hands of their enemies." The valour

and victory of Thomas were arrested by the presence of the sword of God; with

She knowledge of the peril, the Moslems recovered their ranks, and charged the

assailants in the flank and rear. After the loss of thousands, the Christian
general

retreated with a sigh of despair, and the pursuit of the Saracens was checked
by

the military engines of the rampart.

After a siege of seventy days, (3) the patience, and perhaps the provisions,
of

the Damascenes were exhausted; and the bravest of their chiefs submitted to
the

hard dictates of necessity. In the occurrences of peace and war, they had been

taught to dread the fierceness of Caled, and to revere the mild virtues of Abu

(0 Vanity prompted the Arabs to believe, that Thomas was the son-in-law of the
emperor. We know the

children of "Heraclius by his two wives; and his august daughter would not
have married in exile at Damascus.

(See Ducange, Fam. Byzantine, p. US, 119.) Had he been less religious, I might
only suspect the legitimacy

of the damsel.

(2) Al Wakidi (Ockley, p. 101.) says M with poisoned arrows;" but this savage
invention is w repugnant to

the practice of the Greeks and Romans, that I must suspect, on this occasion,
the malevolent credulity of the

Saracens.

(3) Abulfeda allows only seventy days for the siege of Damascus (Anna).
Moslem, p. 67. vers. Reiske;) hot

Etmacin. who mentions this opinion, prolongs the term to six months, and
notices the use ol'baliitte by the Sara­

cens.' (Hist. Saracen, p. 25. 32.) Even this longer period is insufficient to
fill the interval between the battle

of Aiznadin (July, A.D. 633.) and the accession of Omar. 24th July, A. D.
634.) to whose reign the conquest of

Damascus is unanimously ascribed. (Al Wakidi, apud Ockley, vol. i. p. 115.
Abulpharagius, Dynast, p. lit*

vers. Poeock.) Perhaps, as in the Trojan war, the operations were interrupted
by excursions and deiaehmf m»i

till the last seventy days of the siege.

