314 THE DECLINE AND FALL

sects whom they oppressed successively retired beyond the limits of the Romatf

empire; the Marcionites and the Manichseans dispersed their fantastic
opinions'

and apocryphal gospels; the churches of Yemen, and the princes of Hira and
Gas-

san, were instructed in a purer creed by the Jacobite and Nestorian bishops.
(1)

The liberty of choice was presented to the tribes; each Arab was free to elect
or

to compose his private religion; and the rude superstition of his house was
mingled

with the sublime theology of saints and philosophers. A fundamental article of

faith was inculcated by the consent of the learned strangers; the existence of
one

supreme God, who is exalted above the powers of heaven and earth, but who has

often revealed himself to mankind by the ministry of his angels and prophets,
and

whose grace or justice has interrupted, by seasonable miracles, the order of
na­

ture. The most rational of the Arabs acknowledged his power, though they ne­

glected his worship;(2) and *it was habit rather than conviction that still
attached

them to the relics of idolatry. The Jews and Christians were the people of the

book: the Bible was already translated into the Arabic language;(3) and the
vo­

lume of the Old Testament was accepted by the concord of these implacable ene­

mies. In the story of the Hebrew patriarchs, the Arabs were pleased to
discover

the fathers of their nation. They applauded the birth and promises of Ismael;
re­

vered the faith and virtue of Abraham; traced his pedigree and their own to
the

creation of the first man, and imbibed, with equal credulity, the prodigies of
the

holy text, and the dreams and traditions of the Jewish rabbis.

The base and plebeian origin of Mahomet is an unskilful calumny of the Chris­

tians,^) who exalt instead of degrading the merit of their adversary. His
descent

from Ismael was a national privilege or fable; but if the first steps of the
pedigree(5)

are dark and doubtful, he could produce many generations of pure and genuine
no­

bility: he sprung from the tribe of Koreish and the family of Hashem, the most

illustrious of the Arabs, the princes of Mecca, and the hereditary guardians
of the

Caaba. The grandfather of Mahomet was Abdol Motalleb, the son of Hashem,

a wealthy and generous citizen, who relieved the distress of famine with the
sup­

plies of commerce. Mecca, which had been fed by the liberality of the father,

was saved by the courage of the son. The kingdom of Yemen was subject to the

Christian princes of Abyssinia: their vassal Abrahah was provoked by an insult

to avenge the honour of the cross; and the holy city was invested by a train
of ele­

phants and an army of Africans. A treaty was proposed; and in the first
audience,

the grandfa ther of Mahomet demanded the restitution of his cattle. " And
why,"

said Abrahah, " do you not rather implore my clemency in favour of your
temple,

which I have threatened to destroy?"—" Because," replied the intrepid chief, "
the

cattle is my own: the Caaba belongs to the gods, and they will defend their
house

from injury and sacrilege." The want of provisions, or the valour of the
Koreish,

compelled the Abyssinians to a disgraceful retreat: their discomfiture has
been

adorned with a miraculous flight of birds, who showered down stones on the
heads

of the infidels; and the deliverance wSs long commemorated by the era of the
ele­

phant. (6) The glory of Abdol Motalleb was crowned with domestic happiness,

(1) The state of the Jews and Christians in Arabia is described bv Pocoek from
Sharestani, &c. (Specimen,

S. 60. 134, &c.) Hottinger (Hist. Orient, p. 212—238.) d'Herbelot (Bihliot.
Orient, p. 474—479.) Basnage(Hist,

es .luifs, torn. vii. p. 185. lorn. viii. p. 280.) and Sale's Preliminary
Discourse, p. 22, &c. 33, Sec.)

(2) In their offerings, it was a maxim to defraud God for the profit of the
idol, not a more potent, but a more

irritable, patron (Poeock, Specimen, p. 108,109.)

(3) Our versions now extant, whether Jewish or Christian, appear more
recentthan the Koran; but the ex­

istence ot a prior translation may be fairly inferred,—!. From the perpetual
practice of the synagogue, of ex­

pounding the Hebrew lesson by a paraphrase in the vulgar tongue of the
country. 2. From the Analogy of

the Armenian, Persian, Ethiopic versions, expressly quoted by the fathers of
tbefiflh century, who assert, that

the scriptures were translated into all Ihe barbaric languages, (Walton,
Prolegomena ad Biblia Polyglot, p. 34.

03—97. Simeon, Hist. Critique dn V. et du N. Testament, torn. i. p.
180,181,282—286,293. 305,306. tom.iv.

p.206.) r ,

(4) In en conveniunt omnes nt plebeio villiqne genere ortum, &c. (Hottinger,
Hist. Orient, p. 146.) Yet

Theophanes, the most ancient of the Greeks, and the father of many a lie,
confesses that Mahomet was of the

race of Ismael, •» joks, ytmm* T«; ox,; (Chronograph, p. 277.)

(5) Abulf'da (in Vit. Mohammed, c. i. ii..) and Gagnier Vie de Mahomet, p.
25—97.) describe the popular and

approved genealogy or the prophet. At Mecca, I would riot dispute its
authenticity: at Lausanne, I will venture

to observe, 1. That J ram Ismael to Mahomet, a period of two thousand live
hundred years, they reckon thirty,

instead of seventy-fire generations. 2. That the modern Bedoweens are ignorant
of their history and careless

of then-pedigree, (Voyage d'Arvieux, p. 130.133.)

(6) The scene of this history, or fable, is contained in the one hundred and
fifth chapter of the Koran, and

Gagnier (m Praefat. adV,t. Moham. p. 18, &e.) has translated the historical
narrative of Abulreda, which rosy

be illustrated from d Herbelot, (Biblmt. Orientate, p. 12.) and Pocock,
(Specimen, p. 64.) Prideaux, (Lifeof

Mahomet, p. 48.) calls it a lie of the coinage of Mahomet; hut Sale, (Koran,
p. 501—503.) who is half a Mussul­

man, attackl the inconsistent faith of the doctor for believing the miracles
of the Delphic Apollo. ~ '

(Alcoran, torn. i. part 2. p. 14. torn. ii. p. 823.) ascribes the miracle to
the devil, and extorts from the Ma]

the confession, that God would not have defended against the Christians the
idols of the Caaba.

