OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 05

boundless, and perhaps chimerical. The king of Austrasia threatened to chas­

tise Justinian, and to march to the gates of Constantinople:^) he was
overthrown

and slain(2) by a wild bull,(3) as he hunted in the Belgic or German forests.

As soon as Belisarius was delivered from his foreign and domestic enemies, he

seriously applied his forces to the final reduction of Italy. Jn the siege of
Osimo,

the general was nearly transpierced with an arrow, if the mortal stroke had
not

been intercepted by one of his guards, who lost, in that pious office, the use
of his

hand. The Goths of Osimo, four thousand warriors, witn those of Ficsulx and
the

Cottian Alps, were among the last who maintained their independence; and their

gallant resistance, which almost tired the patience, deserved the esteem of
the

conqueror. His prudence refused to subscribe the safe conduct which they
asked,

to join their brethren of Ravenna; but they saved, by an honourable
capitulation,

one moiety at least of their wealth, with the free alternative of retiring
peaceably

to their estates, or enlisting to serve the emperor in his Persian wars. The
mul­

titudes, which yet adhered to the standard of Vitiges, far surpassed the
number

of the Roman troops; but neither prayers, nor defiance, nor the extreme danger

of his most faithful subjects, could tempt the Gothic king beyond the
fortifications

of Ravenna. These fortifications were, indeed, impregnable to the assaults of

art or violence; and when Belisarius invested the capital, he was soon
convinced

that famine only could tame the stubborn spirit of the barbarians. The sea,
the

land, and the channels of the Po, were guarded by the vigilance of the Roman

general; and his morality extended the rights of war to the practice of
poisoning

the waters,(4) and secretly firing the granaries(S) of a besieged city.(fi)
While

he pressed the blockade of Ravenna, he was surprised by the arrival of two am­

bassadors from Constantinople, with a treaty of peace, which Justinian had im­

prudently signed, without deigning to consult the author of his victory. By
this

disgraceful and precarious agreement, Italy and the Gothic treasure were
divided,

and the provinces beyond the Po were left with the regal title to the
successor of

Theodoric. The ambassadors were eager to accomplish their salutary commis­

sion; the captive Vitiges accepted, with trausport, the unexpected offer of a
crown;

honour was less prevalent among the Goths, than the want and appetite of food;

and the Roman chiefs, who murmured at the continuance of the war, professed

implicit submission to the commands of the emperor. If Belisarius had
possessed

only the courage of a soldier, the laurel would have been snatched from his
hand

by timid and envious counsels; but, in this decisive moment, he resolved, with
the

magnanimity of a statesman, to sustain alone the danger and merit of generous

disobedience. Each of his officers gave a written opinion, that the siege of
Ra­

venna was impracticable and hopeless: the general then rejected the treaty of

partition, and declared his own resolution of leading Vitiges in chains to the
feet

of Justinian. The Goths retired with doubt and dismay: this peremptory refusal

deprived them of the only signature which they could trust, and filled their
minds

•with a just apprehension, that a sagacious enemy had discovered the full
extent

of their deplorable state. They compared the fame and fortune of Belisarius
with

the weakness of their ill-fated king; and the comparison suggested an
extraordi­

nary project, to which Vitiges, with apparent resignation, was compelled to
acqui­

esce. Partition would ruin the strength, exile would disgrace the honour, of
the

nation; but they offered their arms, their treasures, and the fortifications
of Ra-

(1) Agathias, lib. i. p. ;4,'l5. Could he haw seduced or subdned the Gepidtc
or Lombards of Pannonia, the

Greek historian is confident that he roust have been destroyed in Thraoe.

(2) The king pointed his spear—the hull overturned a tree on his head—he
expired the same day. Such is

the story of Agathias; but the original historians of France (torn. ii. p.
202. *>3. 5S8. t)67.) impute his death to

* (S)'without losing myself in a labyrinth of species and names— the aurochs, urns, bisons,bubalus. bonasus,  
buffalo, See. (Button Hist. Nat. torn. xi. and Supplement, torn. iii. 6.) it
is certain, that in the sixth century a

large wild species of horned cattle was hunted in the great forests of the
Vosges in Lorraine, and the Ardenuca

(Greg. Turon. torn. ii. lib. x. c. 10. p. 369.) ,, , .

(4) In the siege of Auximum, he first laboured to demolish an old aqueduct,
and then cast into the stream,

I. dead bodies: 2. miichievious herbs: and. 3. quicklime, which is named (says
Procopius, lib. ii. c. 29.) i.t».«;

by the ancients: bv the modems wo.;™.. Yet both words are used as synonymous
in Galen, Dioscorides,

and Lnoian. (Hen. Steph. Thesaur. Ling. Cirxc. torn. iii. p. 748.) ...

(5) The Goths suspected Mathasuintha as an accomplice in the mischief, which
perhaps was occasioned by

accidental lightning. . . . J? . „

(ft) In strict philosophy, a limitation nf the rights of war seems to imply
nonsense and contradiction. Gro-

tins himself is lost in an idle distinction between the jus natnra and the jus
gentium, between poison and in­

fection. He balances in one scale the passages of Homer, (Odyss. A.239.
ctcjsud i lorus (lib. n. c. 20. \n. 7.

silt.) and in the oilier, the examples of Solon (Pmiianius, lib. x. e. 37.)
and Belisarius. See his great work De

lure Belli et Pacis lib. iii. e. 4. s. 15-17., and in Barheyrac's version,
torn. li. p. 2S7, fce. Yet I tan understand

the benefit and validity of an agreement, tacit or espress, mutually to
abstain Irom ctrla.n lnodts ol htiitili'y

tiee the Amphietyomc oa'.h in Kschines dc J-alsa L' gatii ne.

Vol. III. d

