226 THE BECUNE AND FALL

Christianity was successfully preached to the Bactrians, the Huns, the
Persians, the

Indians, the Persarmenians", the Medes, and the Elamites: the barbaric
churches,

from the gulf of Persia to the Caspian sea, were almost infinite; and their
recent

faith was conspicuous in the number and sanctity of their monks and martyrs.

The pepper coast of Malabar, and the isles of the ocean, Socotora and Ceylon,

were peopled with an increasing multitude, of Christians, and the bishops and

clergy of those sequestered regions derived their ordination from the catholic
of

Babylon. In a subsequent age, the zeal of the Nestorians overleaped the
limits,

which had confined the ambition and curiosity both of the Greeks and Persians.

The missionaries of Balch and Samarcand pursued without fear the footsteps of

the roving Tartar, and insinuated themselves into the camps of the valleys of
Imaus,

and the banks of the Selinga. They exposed a metaphysical creed to those
illite­

rate shepherds: to those sanguinary warriors they recommended humanity and re­

pose. Yet a Khan, whose power they vainly magnified, is said to have received

at their hands the rites of baptism, and even of ordination; and the fame of
fires'

tor or firesbyter John(l) has long amused the credulity of Europe. The royal

convert was indulged in the use of a portable altar; but he despatched an
embassy

to the patriarch, to inquire how, in the season of lent, he should abstain
from ani­

mal food, and how he might celebrate the Eucharist in a desert that produced
nei­

ther corn nor wine. In their progress by sea and land, the Nestorians entered
China,

by the port of Canton and the northern residence of Sigan. Unlike the senators

of Rome, who assumed with a smile the characters of priests and augurs, the
man­

darins, who affect in public the reason of philosophers, are devoted in
private to

every mode of popular superstition. They cherished and they confounded the

gods of Palestine, and of India; but the propagation of Christianity awakened
the

jealousy of the state, and, after a short vicissitude of favour and
persecution, the

foreign sect expired in ignorance and oblivion. (2) Under the reign of the
caliphs,

the Nestorian church was diffused from China to Jerusalem and Cyprus; and
their

numbers, with those of the Jacobites, were computed to surpass the Greek and

Latin communions. (3) Twenty-five metropolitans or archbishops, composed their

hierarchy; but several of these were dispensed, by the distance and danger of
the

way, from the duty of personal attendance, on the easy condition that every
six

years they should testify their faith and obedience to the catholic or
patriarch of

Babylon, a vague appellation, which has been successively applied to the royal

seats of Seleucia, Ctesiphon, and Bagdad. These remote branches are long since

withered, and the old patriarchal trunk(4) is now divided by the Elijahs of
Mosul,

the representatives, almost in lineal descent, of the genuine and primitive
succes­

sion, the Josejihs of Amida, who are reconciled to the church of Rome,(5) and
the

Simeons of Van or Ormia, whose revolt at the head of forty thousand families,
was

promoted in the sixteenth century by the sophists of Persia, The number of
three

hundred thousand is allowed for the whole body of the Nestorians, who under
the

p. 9,10. edit. Hoeschel.,) Thevenot (in the fint part of his Relation ties
Voyages, &c.,) and Fabricins (Bibliot.

Grcec. lib. iii. c. 25. torn. ii. p. 603—617.) hai been published by father
Montfaucon at Paris, 1707, in the Nova

Coltectio Patrum (torn. ii. p. 113—346.) It u as the design of the author to
confute the impious heresy of those

who maintain that the earth is a globe, and not a flat oblong table, as it is
represented in the Scriptures (lib. ii.

p. 138.) But the nonsense of the monk is mingled with the practical knowledge
of the traveller, wbo

performed his voyage. A. D. 513, and published his book at Alexandria, A. D.
347, (lib. ii. p. 140,141. Mont­

faucon, Praefar. o. ii.) The Nestorianism of Cosmas, unknown to his learned
editor, was detected by La

Croze (Christianisme des Indes, torn. i. p. 40—55.0 and is continued by
Assenianni (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p.

605,606.)

0) In its long progress to Mosul, Jerusalem, Rome, 8rc. the story of Prester
John evaporated in a monstrous

fable, of which some features have been borrowed from the Lama of Thibet,
(Hist. Genealogiqne des Tartars,

p. 2. p. 42. Hist, de Gengiscan. p. 31, &c.) and were ignorantly transferred
by the Portuguese to the emperor

of Abyssinia. (Ludnlph. Hist. AStbiop. Comment, lib. ii. c. 1.) Yet it is
probable that, in the eleventh and

twelfth centuries, Nestorian Christianity was professed by the horde of
Koraites. (D'Herbelot, p. 256. 915.959.

Assemanni,tum. iv. p. 468—504.)

(2) The Christianity of China, between the seventh and the thirteenth century,
is invincibly proved by the

consent of Chinese. Arabian, Syriac, and Latin evidence. (Assemanni. Biblioth.
Orient, torn. iv. p. 502—552.

Mem. de I'Academie des Inscript. torn. «x. p. 802—819.) The. inscription of
Sigansu. which describes the

fortunes of the Nestorian church, from the first mission, A. D. 636. to the
current year 781, is accused of for-

jjery by La Croze, Voltaire, &c. who become the dupes of their own cunning,
while they are afraid of a Jesuiti­

cal fraud.

(3) Jacobitse et Nestorians plures quam Gneci et Latini. Jacob a Vitriaco,
Hist. Hierosol. lib. ii. c. 76. p.

1093. in the Gesta Dei per Francos. The numbers are given by Thotuassin,
Discipline lie I'Eglise, torn. i.

p. 172.

(4) The division of the patriarchate may be traced in the BibliotHeca Orient,
of Assemanni, torn. i. p. 523—

549. totn.ii. p. 457, ton), iii. p. 603. p. 621—623. torn. iv. p. 164—169. p.
423. p. 622—629, &c.

(5) The pompous language of Rome, on the submission of a Nestorian patriarch,
is elegantly represented in

the seventh book of Fra-Paolo, Babylon, Nineveh, Atbela, and the trophies of
Alexander, Tauris. and Ecba-

«sna, the Tignt and Indus. 1

