170 THE DECLINE AND FALL

and it was the wish of Gregory that he might be unknown in this life, and
glorious

only in the next. Yet this devotion, and it might be sincere, pursued the path

which wquld have been chosen by a crafty and ambitious statesman. The talents

of Gregory, and the splendour which accompanied his retreat, rendered him dear

and useful to the church; and implicit obedience has been always inculcated as
the

first duty of a monk. As soon as he had received the character of deacon,
Grego­

ry was sent to reside at the Byzantine court, the nuncio or minister of the
apostolic

see; and he boldly assumed, in the name of St. Peter, a tone of independent
digni­

ty, which would have been criminal and dangerous in the most illustrious
layman

of the empire.' He returned to Rome with a just increase of reputation, and
after

a short exercise of the monastic virtues, he was dragged from the cloister to
the

papal throne, by the unanimous voice of the clergy, the senate, and the
people.

He alone resisted, or seemed to resist, his own elevation; and his humble
petition,

that Maurice would be pleased to reject the choice of the Romans, could only
serve

to exalt his character in the eyes of the emperor and the public. When the
fatal

mandate was proclaimed, Gregory solicited the aid of some friendly merchants
to

convey him in a basket beyond the gates of Rome, and modestly concealed him­

self some days among the woods and mountains, till his retreat was discovered,
as

it is said, by a celestial light.

The pontificate of Gregory the Great, which lasted thirteen years, six months,

and ten days, is one of the most edifying periods of the history of the
church. His

virtues, and even his faults, a singular mixture of simplicity and cunning, of
pride

and humility, of sense and superstition, were happily suited to his station,
and to

the temper of the times. In his rival, the patriarch of Constantinople, he
con­

demned the antichristian title of universal bishop, which the successor of St.
Peter

was too haughty to concede, and too feeble to assume; and the ecclesiastical
juris­

diction of Gregory was confined to the triple character of bishop of Rome,
primate

of Italy, and apostle of the west. He frequently ascended the pulpit, and
kindled,

by his rude, though pathetic eloquence, the congenial passions of his
audience: the

language of the Jewish prophets was interpreted and applied, and the minds of
the

people, depressed by their present calamities were directed to the hopes and
fears

of the invisible wvld. His precepts and example defined the model of the Ro­

man liturgy;(l) the distribution of the parishes, the calendar of festivals,
the or­

der of processions, the service of the priests-and deacons, the variety and
change

of sacerdotal garments. Till the last days of his life, he officiated in the
canon of

the mass, which continued above three hours; the Gregorian chant(2) has pre­

served the vocal and instrumental music of the theatre, and the rough voices
of

the barbarians attempted to imitate the melody of the Roman school. (3)
Experi­

ence had shown him the efficacy of these solemn and pompous rites, to sooth
the

distress, to confirm the faith, to mitigate the fierceness, and to dispel the
dark en­

thusiasm of the vulgar; and he readily forgave their tendency to promote the
reign

of priesthood and superstition. The bishops of Italy and the adjacent islands
ac­

knowledged the Roman pontiff as their special metropolitan. Even the
existence,

the union, or the translation of episcopal seats, was decided by his absolute
discre­

tion: and his successful inroads into the provinces of Greece, of Spain, and
of Gaul,

might countenance the more lofty pretensions of succeeding popes. He
interposed

to prevent the abuses of popular elections; his jealous care maintained the
purity

of faith and discipline, and the apostolic shepherd assiduously watched over
the

faith and discipline of the subordinate pastors. Under his reign, the Arians
of Ita­

ly and Spain were reconciled to the catholic church, and the conquest of
Britain

reflects less glory on the name of Csesar, than on that of Gregory I. Instead
of

six legions, forty monks were embarked for that distant island, and the
pontiff la-

(1) The Lord'* prayer consists of half a dozen lines: the Sacramentarius and
Antiphonarius of Gre­

gory fill eight hundred and eighty folio pages (torn. iii. p. 1—880.;) yet
these only constitute a part of the

Ordo Romanus, which Mabillon has illustrated, and Fleuryhas abridged (Hist.
Ecclet. torn. viii. p. ISO-

IS*.) *

p) I learn from the abbe Dubos (Reflections sur la Poesie et la Peinture,
torn. iii. p. 174,175.0 that the sim­

plicity of the Ambrosian chant was confined to four modes, while the more
perfect harmony of the Gregorian

comprised the eight modes or fifteen chords of the ancient music. He observes
(p. 332.) that the connoisseurs

admire the preface and many passages of the Gregorian office.

^ (3) John the_ deacon (in Vit. Greg. lib. ii. c. 7.) expresses the early
contempt of the Italians for tramontane

sinking. Alpina scilicet corpora Tocumtuarura tonitruis altisone
perstrepentia, susceptx modulationis du1-

eedinem proprie non resultant: quia bibuli gutturis barbara feritas dam
inflexionibus et repercussionibus mi-

lem nitilur edere cantitenam. naturali quodam fragore quasi plaustra per
gradus confuse sonantia rigidas to-

cesiactat, &c. In the time of Charlemagne, the Franks, though with some
reluctance,admitted the justice

of the reproach. Muraton, Dissert. 85.

