138 THE DECLINE AND FALL

djiced, that marriage, like other partnerships, might be dissolved by the
abdica^

tion of one of the associates. In three centuries of prosperity and
corruption, this

principle was enlarged to frequent practice and pernicious abuse. Passion,
inte­

rest, or caprice, suggested daily motives for th« dissolution of marriage; a
word,

a sigh, a message, a letter, the mandate of afreedman, declared the
separation,

the most tender of human connexions was degraded to a transient society of
profit

or pleasure. According to the various conditions of life, both sexes
alternately

felt the disgrace and injury; an inconstant spouse transferred her wealth to a
new

family, abandoning a numerous, perhaps a spurious, progeny to tha paternal au­

thority and care of her late husband; a beautiful virgin might be dismissed to
the

world, old, indigent, and friendless; but the reluctance of the Romans, when
they

were pressed to marriage by Augustus, sufficiently marks, that the prevailing
in­

stitutions were least favourable to the males. A specious theory is confuted
by

this free and perfect experiment, which demonstrates, that the liberty of
divorce

does not contribute to happiness and virtue. The facility of separation would
de­

stroy all mutual confidence, and inflame every trifling dispute: the minute
differ­

ence between a husband and a stranger, which might so easily be removed, might

still more easily be forgotten; and the matron, who in five years can submit
to the

embraces of eight husbands, must cease to reverence the chastity of her own

person.fl)

Insufficient remedies followed, with distant and tardy steps, the rapid
progress

of the evil. The ancient worship of the Romans afforded a peculiar goddess to

hear and reconcile the complaints of a married life; but her epithet of
Virijila-

ca,(2) the appeaser of husbands, too clearly indicates on which side
submission

and repentance were always expected. Every act of a citizen was subject to the

judgment of the censors; the first who used the privilege of divorce assigned,
at

their command, the motives of this conduct;(3) and a senator was expelled for

dismissing his virgin spouse without the knowledge or advice of his friends.

Whenever an action was instituted for the recovery of a marriage portion, the

pretor, as the guardian of equity, examined the cause and the characters, and

gently inclined the scale in favour of the guiltless and injured party.
Augustus,

■who united the powers of both magistrates, adopted their different modes of
re­

pressing or chastising the license of divorce. (4) The presence of seven Roman

witnesses was required for the validity of this solemn and deliberate act; if
any

adequate provocation had been given by the husband, instead of the delay of
two

years, he was compelled to refund immediately, or in the space of six months;
but

if he could arraign the manners of his wife, her guilt or levity was expiated
by

the loss of the sixth or eighth part of her marriage portion. The Christian

princes were the first who specified the just causes of a private divorce;
their in­

stitutions, from Constantine to Justinian, appear to fluctuate between the
custom

of the empire and the wishes of the churcn,(5) and the author of the Novels
too

frequently reforms the jurisprudence of the Code and Pandects. In the most ri­

gorous laws, a wife was condemned to support a gamester, a drunkard, or a
liber­

tine, unless he were guilty of homicide, poison, or sacrilege, in which cases
the

marriage, as it should seem, might have been dissolved by the hand of the
execu­

tioner. But the sacred right of the husband was invariably maintained to
deliver

his name and family from the disgrace of adultery; the list of mortal sins,
either

male or female, was curtailed and enlarged by successive regulations, and the
ob­

stacles of incurable impotence, long absence, and monastic profession, were
al­

lowed to rescind the matrimonial obligation. Whoever transgressed the permis­

sion of the law, was subject to various and heavy penalties. The woman was

(1) —— sic fiunt octo mariti

Qulnque per autumuos.

Juvenal. Satir. vi. 20.

A rapid iticceission which may yet be credible, as well ai the non coniulam
numero, sed maritorum annoa

soos coraputant, of Seneca (de Beneficiis, iii. 16.) Jerome saw at Rome a
triumphant husband bury his twen-

g-first wife, who had interred twenty-two of his less sturdy predecessors
(Opp. torn. i. p. 90. ad Gerontiam.)

ut the ten husbands in a month of the poet Martial is an extravagant hyperbole
(lib. iv. epigram. 7.)

(2) Sacellum Viriplacse (Valerius Maximus, lib. ii. e. 1.) in the Palatine
region appears in the time of Theo-

dosius.in the description of Rome by Publius Victor.

(3) Valerius Maximus, lib. ii. c. 9. With some propriety he judges divorce
more criminal than celibacy:

itlo namque conjugalia sacra gpreta tantum, hoc etiam injuriose tractata.

(4) See the laws of Augustus and his successors, in Heineccitis, ad Legem
Papiara Poppseam, c. xix.inOpp.

torn. vi. P. 1. p. 323-333.

(s) Alia--sunt leges Cauarurn, alias Christi; aliud Fapintanus, aliud Faulus
aoster nracipit (Jerom. torn. i. p.

1»2. Selden, Uxor Ebraica, lib. iii. c. 31. p. 847-8M.)

