OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 367

hours, brought a seasonable supply of arms and provisions to the camp of the
Sara­

cens. Their labours were terminated by the unexpected surrender of Csesarea:

the Roman prince had embarked in the night;(l) and the defenceless citizens
soli­

cited their pardon with an offering; of two hundred thousand pieces of gold.
The

remainder of the province, Ramlah, Ptolemaisor Achre, Sichem orNeapolis, Gaza,

Ascalon, Berytus, Sidon, Gabala, Laodicea, Apamea, Hierapolis, no longer pre­

sumed to dispute the will of the conqueror: and Syria bowed under the sceptre
of

the caliphs seven hundred years after Pompey had despoiled the last of the
Mace­

donian kings. (2)

The sieges and battles of six campaigns had consumed many thousands of the

Moslems. They died with the reputation and cheerfulness of martyrs; and the

simplicity of their faith may be expressed in the words of an Arabian youth,
when

he embraced, for the last time, his sister and mother. " Is it not" said he, "
the

delicacies of Syria, or the fading delights of this world, that has prompted
me to de­

vote my life in the cause of religion? But I seek the favour of God and his
apostle;

and I have heard, from one of the companions of the prophet, that the spirits
of the

martyrs will be lodged in the crops of green birds, who shall taste the
fruits, and

drink of the rivers of paradise. Farewell, we shall meet again among the
groves

and fountains which God has provided for his elect." The faithful captives
might

exercise a passive and more arduous resolution; and a cousin of Mahomet is
cele­

brated for refusing, after an abstinence of three days, the wine and pork, the
only

nourishment that was allowed by the malice of the infidels. The frailty of
some

weaker brethren exasperated the implacable spirit of fanaticism: and the
father of

Amer deplored, in pathetic strains, the apostacy and damnation of a son, who
had

renounced the promises of God, and the intercession of the prophet, to occupy,

with the priests and deacons, the lowest mansions of hell. The more fortunate

Arabs, who survived the war, and persevered in the faith, were restrained by
their

abstemious leader from the abuse of prosperity. After a refreshment of three

days, Abu Obeidah withdrew his troops from the pernicious contagion of the
luxury

of Antioch, and assured the caliph that their religion and virtue could omy be
pre­

served by the hard discipline of poverty and labour. But the virtue of Omar,
how­

ever rigorous to himself, was kind and liberal to his brethren. After a just
tribute

of praise and thanksgiving, he dropped a tear of compassion; and, sitting down
on

the ground, wrote an answer, in which he mildly censured the severity of his
lieu­

tenant. " God," said the successor of the prophet, "has not forbidden the use
of

the good things of this world to faithful men, and such as have performed good

works. Therefore you ought to have given them leave to rest themselves, and
par-

• take freely of those good things which the country affordeth. If any of the
Saracens

have no families in Arabia, they may marry in Syria; and whosoever of them
wants

any female slaves, he may purchase as many as he hath occasion for." The con­

querors prepared to use, or to abuse, this gracious permission: but the year
of their

triumph was marked by a mortality of men and cattle; and twenty-five thousand

Saracens were snatched away from the possession of Syria. The death of Abu

Obeidah might be lamented by the Christians; but his brethren recollected that
he

was one of the ten elect, whom the prophet had named as the heirs of paradise.
(3)

Caled survived his brethren about three years; and the tomb of the sword of
God is.

shown in the neighbourhood of Emesa. His valour, which founded in Arabia and

Syria, the empire of the caliphs, was fortified by the opinion of a special
provi­

dence; and as long as he wore a cap, which had been blessed by Mahomet, he

deemed himself invulnerable amidst the darts of the infidels.

The place of the first conquerors was supplied by a new generation of their

children and countrymen: became the seat and support of the house of Ommiyah;

and the revenue, the soldiers, the ships of that powerful kingdom, were conse­

crated to enlarge on every side the empire of the caliphs. But the Saracens
de-

(1) In the loose and obscure chronology of the times, I am fruited by an
authentic record (in the book of Ce-

remoniei of Constantine Porphyrogenitus.) which certifies that June 4, A. D.
638. the emperor crowned his

younger ion Heraclius in the presence of his eldest. Cbnstantme, and in the
palace of Constantinople; that Ja­

nuary 1, A. D. 639. the royal procession visited the great church,and on the
fourth of the same month the

hippodrome.

(2) Siity-five years before Christ, Syria Pontusqne monnmenta sunt Cn. Pompeii
virtutis (Veil. Patereul. 2.

38,) rather of his fortune and power: he adjudged Syria to be a Roman
province, and the last of the Selencides

were incapable of drawing a sword in the defence of their patrimony. (See the
uriginal tests collected by Usher.

Annal. p. 420.)

(3) Abulfeda, Annal. Moslem, p. 73. Mahomet could artfully vary the praises of
his disciples. Of Omar he

was accustomed to say, that if a prophet could arise after himself, it would
be Omar: and that in a general ca­

lamity, Omar would be accepted by the divine justice (Ockley, vol. i. p. 321,?

