68 THE DECLINE AND FALL

Thracian youth. Tkeodosius had been educated in the Eunomian heresy; the;

African voyage was consecrated by the baptism and auspicious name of the first

soldier who embarked; and the proselyte was adopted into the family of his
spi­

ritual parents.(l) Belisarius and Antonina. Before they touched the shores of

Africa, this holy kindred degenerated into sensual love; and as Antonina1 soon

overleaped the bounds of modesty arid caution, the Roman general was alone ig­

norant of his own dishonour. During their residence at Carthage, he surprised

the two lovers in a subterraneous chamber, solitary, warm, and almost naked)

Anger flashed from his eyes. With the helfi of this young man (said the
unblushing

Antonina,) Iiuas secreting our most precious effects from the knowledge of
Justi­

nian. The youth resumed his garments, and the pious husband consented to dis­

believe the evidence of his own senses. From this pleasing and perhaps
volunta­

ry delusion, Belisarius was awakened at Syracuse, by the officious information
of

Macedonia: and that female attendant, after requiring an oath, for her
security,

produced two chamberlains, who, like herself, had often beheld the adulteries
of

Antonina. A hasty flight into Asia saved Theodosius from the justice of an in­

jured husband, who had signified to one of his guards the order of his death;
but

the tears of Antonina, and her artful seduction, assured the credulous hero of
her

innocence; and he stooped, against his faith and judgment, to abandon those
im­

prudent friends who had presumed to accuse or doubt the chastity of his wife.

The revenge of a guilty woman is implacable and bloody: the unfortunate Mace­

donia, with the two witnesses, were secretly arrested by the minister of her
cru­

elty: their tongues were cut out, their bodies were hacked into small pieces,
and

their remains were cast into the sea of Syracuse. A rash, though judicious
say­

ing of Constantino, "I would sooner have punished the adultress than the boy,"

was deeply remembered by Antonina: and two years afterward, when despair had

armed that officer against his general, her sanguinary advice decided and
hastened

his execution. Even the indignation of Photius was not forgiven by his mother;

the exile of her son prepared the recall of her lover; and Theodosius
condescend­

ed to accept the pressing and humble invitation of the conqueror of Italy. In
the

absolute direction of his household, and in the important commissions of peace
and

war,(2) the favourite youth most rapidly acquired a fortune of four hundred
thou­

sand pounds sterling; and, after their return to Constantinople, the passion
of An­

tonina, at least, continued ardent and unabated. But fear, devotion, and
lassitude,

perhaps, inspired Theodosius with more serious thoughts. He dreaded the busy

scandal of the capital, and the indiscreet fondness of the wife of Belisarius;
es­

caped from her embraces, and retiring to Ephesus, shaved his head, and took
re­

fuge in the sanctuary of a monastic life. The despair of the new Ariadne could

scarcely have been excused by the death of her husband. She wept, she tore her

hair, she filled the palace with her cries; " she had lost the dearest of
friends, a

tender, a faithful, a laborious friend!" But her warm entreaties, fortified by
the

prayers of Belisarius, were insufficient to draw the holy monk from the
solitude

of Ephesus. It was not till the general moved forward for the Persian war,
that

Theodosius could be tempted to return to Constantinople; and the short
interval

before the departure of Antonina herself was boldly devoted to love and
pleasure.

A philosopher may pity and forgive the infirmities of female nature, from
which

he receives no real injury; but contemptible is the husband who feels, and yet
en­

dures, his own infamy in that of his wife. Antonina pursued her son with
impla­

cable hatred; and the gallant Photius(3) was exposed to her secret
persecutions ill

the camp beyond the Tigris. Enraged by his own wrongs, and by the dishonour of

his blood,he castaway in his turn the sentiments of nature, and revealed to
Belisa­

rius the turpitude of a woman who Uad violated all the duties of a mother and
a wife.

From the surprise and indignation of the Roman general, his former credulity,
ap­

pears to have been sincere: he embraced the knees of the son of Antonina,
adjured

him to remember his obligations rather than his birth, and confirmed at the
altar

their holy vows of revenge and mutual defence. The dominion of Antonina was

impaired by absence; and when she met her husband, on his return from the Per­

sian confines, Belisarius, in his first and transient emotions, confined her
person,

(1) Compare the Vandalic War (lib. i. c. 12.) with ilic Anecdoler, (c. l.)and
Alemannus, (p. 2,3.) Thft

mode of baptismal adoption was revived by Leo the philosopher.

(2) In November, 537, Photius arrested the pope. (Liberat. Brer. c. 22. Pagi.
torn. ii. p. 562.) About the

end of 539, Belisarius sent Thendosins—rov rn ctxix rtj aurcu i^tirruir*—on an
important and lucrative commis--

sion ijo Ravenna. (Goth. lib. ii. c. 18.)

(3) Theoplian« (Chronograph, p. 204.) styles him P/iotinui, the son-in-law of
Fel'uarius: and he is copied

by the Historia Miscella and Anastasiui.

