OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 93

graC l) were honoured with the crown of martyrdom. (2) The churches of Ara­

bia implored the protection of the Abyssinian monarch. The Negus passed the

Red Sea with a fleet and army, deprived the Jewish proselyte of his kingdom
and

life, and extinguished a race of princes, who had ruled above two thousand
years

the sequestered region of myrrh and frankincense. The conqueror immediately

announced the victory of the gospel, requested an orthodox patriarch, and so

warmly professed his friendship to the Roman empire, that Justinian was
flattered

by the hope of diverting the silk-trade through the channel of Abyssinia, and

of exciting the forces of Arabia against the Persian king. Nonnosus, descended

from a family of ambassadors, was named by the emperor to execute this import­

ant commission. He wisely declined the shorter, but more dangerous road
through

the sandy deserts of Nubia; ascended the Nile, embarked on the Red Sea, and

safely landed at the African port of Adulis. From Adulis to the royal city of

Axume is no more than fifty leagues, in a direct line; but the winding passes
of the

mountains detained the ambassador fifteen days; and as he traversed the
forests,

he saw, and vaguely computed, about five thousand wild elephants. The capital,

according to his report, was large and populous; and the -village of Axume is
still

conspicuous by the regal coronations, by the ruins of a Christian temple, and
by

sixteen or seventeen obelisks inscribed with Grecian characters. (3) But the
Ne-

sjus gave audience in the open field, seated on a lofty chariot, which was
drawn by

tour elephants superbly caparisoned, and surrounded by his nobles and
musicians.

He was clad in a linen garment and cap, holding in his hand two javelins and a
light

shield; and, although his nakedness was imperfectly covered, he displayed the

barbaric pomp of gold chains, collars, and bracelets, richly adorned with
pearls

and precious stones. The ambassador of Justinian knelt; the Negus raised him

from the ground, embraced Nonnosus, kissed the seal, perused the letter,
accept­

ed the Roman alliance, and, brandishing his weapons, denounced implacable war

against the worshippers of fire. But the proposal of the silk-trade was
eluded;

and notwithstanding the assurances, and perhaps the wishes, of the
Abyssinians,

these hostile menaces evaporated without effect. The Homerites were unwilling

to abandon their aromatic groves, to explore a sandy desert, and to encounter,
af­

ter all their fatigues, a formidable nation from whom they had never received
any-

personal injuries. Instead of enlarging his conquests, the king of Ethiopia
was in­

capable of defending his possessions. Abrahah, the slave of a Roman merchant

of Adulis, assumed the sceptre of the Homerites; the troops of Africa were se­

duced by the luxury of the climate; and Justinian solicited the friendship of
the

usurper, who honoured, with a slight tribute, the supremacy of his prince. Af­

ter a long series of prosperity, the power of Abrahah was overthrown before
the

gates of Mecca; his children were despoiled by the Persian conqueror; and the

Ethiopians were finally expelled from the continent of Asia. This narrative of

obscure and remote events is not foreign to the decline and fall of the Roman
em-

ire. If a Christian power had been maintained in Arabia, Mahomet must have

een crushed in his cradle, and Abyssinia would have prevented a revolution
which

has changed the civil and religious state of the world-(4)

(1) The city of Negra or NegVan, in Yemen, is surrounded with palm-trees, and
stands in the high road be­

tween Saana, the capita], and Mecca, from the former ten, from the latter
twenty days1 journey of a caravan

of camels, (Abu Ifeda, Descript. Arabige, p. 520

(2) The martyrdom of St. Arethas, prince of Negra, and his three hundred and
forty companions, is em­

bellished in the legends of Metaphrastes,and Nicephorus Callistus, copied by
Baronius, A. D. 522. No. 22—

C6. A. D. 523. No. 16—29.,) and refuted, with obscure diligence, by Basnage
(Hist, des Juifs, torn. xii. lib. s. e.

ii. p. 333—348.) who investigates the state of the Jews in Arabia and
Ethiopia.

(3) Alvarez (in Ramusio, torn. i. fol. 219 vers. 221 vers.) saw the
flourishing state of Axume in the year 1520

—kiogo molto buono e grande. It was ruined in the same century by the Turkish
invasion. No more than

one hundred houses remain; but the memory of its past greatness is preserved
by the regal coronatiou (Lu-

dolph. Hist, et Comment, lib. ii. c. 11.)

(4) The revolutions of Yemen in the sixth century must be collected from
Procopius(Persic, lib. i. c. 19,

20.;) Theophanes Byzant.(apud Phot. cod. Ixiii. p. 30.;) St. Theophanes (in
Chronograph, p. 144,145.188,180.

206,207. who is full of strange blunders;) Pocock (Specimen Hist. Arab. p.
62—65;) d'Herbelot (Bibliot. Orien-

tale, p. 12—477.,)and Sale's Preliminary Discourse and Koran (c. 105.) The
revolt of Abrahah is mentioned

fcy Procopius; and hit fall, though clouded with miracles, is an historical
fact.

