OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 299

to-revive the institutions of the Roman monarchy. But his successors only once

in their lives appeared on the banks of the Tiber, to receive their crown in
the

Vatican^) Their absence was contemptible, their presence odious and formi­

dable. They descended from the Alps, at the head of their barbarians, who were

strangers and enemies to the country; and their transient visit was a scene of
tu­

mult and bloodshed. (2) A faint remembrance of their ancestors still tormented

the Romans; and they beheld with pious indignation the succession of Saxons,

Franks, Svvabians, and Bohemians, who usurped the purple and prerogatives of

the Caesars.

There is nothing perhaps more adverse to nature and reason, than to hold in

obedience remote countries and foreign nations, in opposition to their
inclination

and interest. A torrent of barbarians may pass over the earth, but an
extensive

empire must be supported by a refined system of policy and oppression; in the

centre, an absolute power, prompt in action, and rich in resources; a swift
and

easy communication with the extreme parts: fortifications to check the first
effort

of rebellion: a regular administration to protect and punish; and a well-
disciplined

army to inspire fear, without provoking discontent and despair. Far different
was

the situation of the. German Cscsars, who were ambitious to enslave the
kingdom

of Italy. Their patrimonial estates were stretched along the Rhine, or
scattered

in the provinces; but this ample domain was alienated by the imprudence or
dis­

tress of successive princes; and their revenue from minute and vexatious
preroga­

tive, was scarcely sufficient for the maintenance of their household. Their
troops

were formed by the legal or voluntary service of their feudal vassals, who
passed the

Alps with reluctance, assumed the license of rapine and disorder, and
capriciously

deserted before the end of the campaign. Whole armies were swept away by the

pestilential influence of the climate: the survivors brought back the bones of
their

princes and nobles,(3) and the effects of their own intemperance were often
im­

puted to the treachery and malice of the Italians, who rejoiced at least in
the cala­

mities of the barbarians. This irregular tyranny might contend on equal terms

with the petty tyrants of Italy; nor can the people, or the reader, be much
inte­

rested in the event of the quarrel. But in the eleventh and twelfth centuries,
the

Lombards rekindled the flame of industry and freedom; and the generous example

was at length imitated by the republics of Tuscany. In the Italian cities a
mu­

nicipal government had never beeu totally abolished; and their first
privileges were

granted by the favour and policy of the emperors, who were desirous of
erecting a

plebeian barrier against the independence of the nobles. But their rapid
progress,

the daily extension of their power and pretensions, were fou' ded on the
numbers

and spirit of these rising communities. (4) Each city filled the measure of
her

diocess or district: the jurisdiction of the counts and bishops, of the
marquises and

counts, was banished from the land; and the proudest nobles were persuaded or

compelled to desert their solitary castles, and to embrace the more honourable

character of freemen and magistrates. The legislative authority was inherent
in

the general assembly; but the executive powers were intrusted to three
consuls,

annually chosen from the three orders of cafitains, valvassors,{_5) and
common's,

into which the republic was divided. Under the protection of equal law, the
la­

bours of commerce and agriculture were gradually revived; but the martial
spirit

of the Lombards was nourished by the presence of danger; and as often as the
bell

was rung, or the standard (6) erected, the gates of the city poured forth a
nu­

merous and intrepid band, whose zeal in their own cause was soon guided by the

use and discipline of arms. At the foot of these popular ramparts, the pride
of the

(1) The coronation of the emperor, and tome original ceremonies of the tenth
century, arc preserved in-the

Pauegyric oo Bereugarius, (Script. Ital. torn. ii. part 1. 405—414.)
illustrated by the notes of Hadrian, Vale-

■iui. and Leibnitz. Sigonitls has related the whole process of the Roman
expedition in good Latin, but with,

sons' errors of time and fact. (lib. vi. p. 441—446.)

(2) In a quarrel at tlie coronation of Conrad II. Muratori takes leave to
observe—dovcano ben essere alfora

indiscipiiiuti.Barbario, txutinli i Tedeschi. Annal. torn. viii. p. 368.

(3) After boiling away the flesh. The caldrons for that purpose were a
necessary piece of travelling furni­

ture; and a German who was using it for his brother, promised it to a friend,
after it should have been em­

ployed for himself (Schmidt, torn. iii. p. 423, 424.) The same author observes
that the whole Saxon line was

extinguished in Italy, (torn. i. p. 440.)

(4) Otho, bishop of Frinsiniren, has left an important passage on the Italian
cities; (lib. ii. c. 13. in Script.

Ital. torn. vi. p. 707—710.) and the rise, progress and government of these
republics, are perfectly illustrated

by Muratori. (Antiquitat. Ital. Medii .Svi, torn. iv. dissert. 4J—52. p.
1—675. Anna!, torn. 8—10.)

(J) For these titles, -ee Selden, (Titles of Honour, vol. iii. part 1. p.
488.) Ducange, (Gloss. Latin, torn. ii.

p. 140. torn. vi. p. 776.) and St. Marc. (Abrege Chronologique, torn. ii. p.
719.)

A6) The Lombards invented and used the curortum, a standard planted una car or
wagon, drawn bya

team of oxftn. Ducange, torn. ii. p. 194,195. Muratori, Amiqultat. torn. ii.
<tis. 36. p. 480—493.)

