190 THE DECLINE AND FALL

zond,' of the Asiatic coast. After the loss of Egypt, the capital was
afflicted by

famine and pestilence; and the emperor, incapable of resistance, and hopeless
of

relief, had resolved to transfer his person and government to the more secure
resi­

dence of Carthage. His ships were already laden with the treasures of the pa­

lace, but his flight was arrested by the patriarch, who armed the powers of
reli­

gion in the defence of his country, led Heraclius to the altar of St. Sophia,
and ex­

torted a solemn oath, that he would live and die with the people whom God had

intrusted to his care. The chagan was encamped in the plains of Thrace, but he

dissembled his perfidious designs, and solicited an interview with the emperor

near the town of Heraclea. Their reconciliation was celebrated with equestrian

games; the senate and people in their gayest apparel resorted to the festival
of

peace, and the Avars beheld with envy and desire, the spectacle of Roman luxu­

ry. On a sudden the hippodrome was encompassed by the Scythian cavalry, who

had pressed their secret and nocturnal march: the tremendous sound of the cha-

gan's whip gave the signal of the assault; and Heraclius wrapping his diadem

round his arm, was saved, with extreme hazard, by the fleetness of his horse.
So

rapid was the pursuit, that the Avars almost entered the golden gate of
Constan­

tinople with the flying crowds;(l) but the plunder of the suburbs rewarded
theii

treason, and they transported beyond the Danube, two hundred and seventy thou­

sand captives. On the shore of Chalcedon, the emperor held a safer conference

with a more honourable foe, who, before Heraclius descended from his galley,
sa­

luted with reverence and pity the majesty of the purple. The friendly offer of

Sain the Persian general, to conduct an embassy to the presence of the great
king,

was accepted with the warmest gratitude, and the prayer for pardon and peace

■was humbly presented by the pretorian prefect, the prefect of the city, and
one

of the first ecclesiastics of the patriarchal church. (2) But the lieutenant
of Chos-

roes had fatally mistaken the intentions of his master. " It was not an
embassy

(said the tyrant of Asia,) it was the person of Heraclius, bound in chains,
that he

should have brought to the foot of my throne. I will never give peace to
the_em­

peror of Rome till he has abjured his crucified God, and embraced the worship
of

the sun." Sain was flayed alive, according to the inhuman practice of his
coun­

try; and the separate and rigorous confinement of the ambassadors, violated
the

laws of nations and the faith of an express stipulation. Yet the experience of

six years at length persuaded the Persian monarch to renounce the conquest of

Constantinople, and to specify the annual tribute or ransom of the Roman
empire:

a thousand talents of gold, a thousand talents of silver, a thousand silk
robes, a

thousand horses, and a thousand virgins. Heraclius subscibed these ignominious

terms, but the time and space which he obtained to collect such treasures from

the poverty of the east, was industriously employed in the preparations of a
bold

and desperate attack.

Of the characters conspicuous in history, that of Heraclius is one of the most

extraordinary and inconsistent. In the first and last years of a long reign,
the

emperor appears to be the slave of sloth, of pleasure, or of superstition, the
care­

less and impotent spectator of the public calamities. But the languid mists of
the

morning and evening are separated by the brightness of the meridian sun: the
Ar-

•cadius of the palace arose the Cxsar of the camp; and the honour of Rome and

Heraclius was gloriously retrieved by the exploits and trophies of six
adventurous

■campaigns. It was the duty of the Byzantine historians to have revealed the
causes

of his slumber and vigilance. At this distance we can only conjecture, that he

was endowed with more personal courage than political resolution: that he was

detained by the charms, and perhaps the arts, of his niece Martina, with whom,

.after the death of Eudocia, he contracted an incestuous marriage;(3) and that
he

yielded to the base advice of the counsellors, who urged, as a fundamental
law,

that the life of the emperor should never be exposed in the field. (4) Perhaps
he

(0 The Paschal Chronicle, which sometimes introduces fragments of history into
a barren list of names and

dates, gives the best account of the treason of the Avars, p. S89,390. The
number of captives is added by

Nicephorus.

(2) Some original pieces, such as the speech or letter of the Roman
ambassadors, (p. 386—388.) likewise con­

stitute the merit of the Paschal Chronicle, which was composed, perhaps at
Alexandria, under the reign of

Heraclius.

(3) Nicephorus (p. 10,11.) who brands this marriage with the names of *fctr/iw
and erfs/urev, is happy to ob­

serve, that of two sons, its incestuous fruit, the elder was marked by
Providence with a stiff neck, the younger

with the loss of hearing.

(4) George of Pisidia; (Acroas. 1.112—125., p. 5.) who states the opinions,
acquits the pusillanimous counsel­

lors of any sinister views. Would he have excused the proud and contemptuous
admonition of Crispus?

