202 THE DECLINE AND FALL

Mary, the birth of Christ, and the thirty years that preceded the exercise of
hi*

ministry. He first appeared on the banks of the Jordan in the form of perfect

manhood; but it was a form only, and not a substance; a human figure created
by

the hand of Omnipotence, to imitate the faculties and actions of a man, and to
im­

pose a perpetual illusion on the senses of his friends and enemies. Articulate

sounds vibrated on the ears of the disciples; but the image, which was
impressed

on their optic nerve, eluded the more stubborn evidence of the touch; and they

enjoyed the spiritual, not the corporeal presence of the Son of God. The rage

of the Jews was idly wasted against an impassive phantom; and the mystic
scenes

of the passion and death, and the resurrection of Christ, were represented on
the

theatre of Jerusalem for the benefit of mankind. If it were urged, that such
ideal

mimicry, such incessant deception, was unworthy of the God of truth, the
Docetes

agreed itit\\ too many of their orthodox brethren in the justification of
pious false­

hood. In the system of the Gnostics, the Jehovah of Israel, the creator of
this

lower world, was a rebellious, or at least an ignorant spirit. The Son of God
de­

scended upon earth to abolish his temple and his law: and for the
accomplishment

of this salutary end, he dexterously transferred to his own person the hope
and

predictiori of a temporal Messiah.

One of the most subtle disputants of the Manichaean school, has pressed the

danger and the indecency of supposing, that the God of the Christians in the
state

of a human fetus, emerged at the end of nine months from a female womb. The

pious horror of his antagonists provoked them to disclaim all sensual
circumstances

of conception and delivery; to maintain that the divinity passed through Mary
like

a sun-beam through a plate of glass, and to assert, that the seal of her
virginity re­

mained unbroken even at the moment when she became the mother, of Christ.

But the rashness of these concessions has encouraged a milder sentiment of
those

of the Docetes, who taught, not that Christ was a phantom, but that he was
clothed

with an impassable and incorruptible body. Such, indeed, in the more orthodox

system, he has acquired since his resurrection, and such he must have always
pos­

sessed, if it were capable of pervading, without resistance or injury, the
density

of intermedials matter. Devoid of its most essential properties, it might be
ex­

empt from the attributes and infirmities of the flesh. A foetus that could
increase

from an invisible point to its full maturity; a child, that could attain the
stature of

perfect manhood, without deriving any nourishment from the ordinary sources,

might continue to exist without repairing a daily waste from a daily supply of
ex­

ternal matter. Jesus might share the repasts of his disciples without being
sub­

ject to the calls of thirst or hunger; and his virgin purity was never sullied
by the

involuntary stains of sensual concupiscence. Of a body thus singularly
constituted,

a question would arise, by what means, and of what materials, it was
originally

framed; and our sounder theology is startled by an answer which was not
peculiar

to the Gnostics, that both the form and the substance proceeded from the
divine

essence. The idea of pure and absolute spirit is a refinement of modern
philoso­

phy; the incorporeal essence, ascribed by the ancients to human souls,
celestial

beings, and even the Deity himself, does not exclude the notion of extended
space;

and their imagination was satisfied with a subtle nature of air, or fire, or
ether, in­

comparably more perfect than the grossness of the material world. If we define

the place, we must describe the figure of the Deity. Our experience, perhaps

our vanity, represents the power of reason and virtue under a human form. The"

anthropomorphithes, who swarmed among the monks of Egypt, and the catho­

lics of Africa, could produce the express declaration of Scripture, that man
was

made after the image of his Creator.(l) The venerable Serapian, one of the

saints of the Nitrian desert, relinquished, with many a tear, his darling
prejudice,

and bewailed, like an infant, his unlucky conversion, which had stolen away
his

God, and left his mind without any visible object of faith or devotion. (2)

(1) The pilgrim Cassian, who visited Egypt in the beginning of the fifth
century, observes and lament! the

reign of anthropomorphism among the monks, who were not conscious that they
embraced the system of Epi-

enrus. (Cicero, de Nat. Deorum, 1 18— 34.) Ab oniverso propemodum genere
monachorum, qui per totam

provinciam Egyptum morabantur, pro simplieitatis errors suseeptum est, ut e
eontrario memoratura pontifi-

cem (Theophilus) velut hseresi gravissima df praratum, pars maxima seniorum ab
unirerso f raternitatit corpore

decerneret destestandnm. (Cassian, Collation, 16.3.) As long as St. Augustin
remained a Manicbsean, be was

scandalized by the anthropomorphism of the vulgar catholics.

(2) Tta est inoratione senex im*nteconfuius,eoquod iliam MvSpoHro^op^ow
imaginem Deitatis, quam propo-

nere sibi in oratione consueverat aboleri de suo corde sentiret, lit in
amarissimos fletus, crebmsque singultus

repente prorumpens, in terrain prostratut, cum ejulatu validissimo
proclamaret,—" Heu me'misenim!" tulerunt

a me Deum meum, et quern nunc tencam non habeo, vel quern adorera. aut
imerpellera jam nescio. Cassian.

Collat. 10.2.

