OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

tiute edicts, for the correction of abuses, the reformation of manners, the
economy

of his farms, the care of his poultry, and even the sale of his eggs. He
wished

to improve the laws and character of the Franks; and his attempts, however
fee­

ble and imperfect, are deserving of praise: the inveterate evils of the times
were

suspended or mollified by his governmental) but in his institutions I can
seldom

discover the general views and the immortal spirit of a legislator, who
survives

himself for the benefit of posterity. The union and stability of his empire
de­

pended on the life of a single man; he imitated the dangerous practice of
dividing

his kingdoms among his sons; and, after his numerous diets, the whole
constitution

was left to fluctuate between the disorders of anarchy and despotism. His
esteem

for the piety and knowledge of the clergy tempted him to intrust that aspiring

order with temporal dominion and civil jurisdiction; and his son Lewis, when
he

was stripped and degraded by the bishops, might accuse, in some measure, the

imprudence of his father. His laws enforced the imposition of tithes, because
the

demons had proclaimed in the air that the default of payment had been the
cause

of the last scarcity. (2) The literary merits of Charlemagne are attested by
the

foundation of schools, the introduction of arts, the works which were
published in

his name, and his familiar connexion with the subjects and strangers whom he
in­

vited to his court to educate both the prince and people. His own studies were

tardy, laborious, and imperfect; if he spoke Latin, and understood Greek, he
de­

rived the rudiments of knowledge from conversation, rather than from books;
and

in his mature age, the emperor strove to acquire the practice of writing,
which

every peasant now leams in his infancy.(3) The grammar and logic, the music

and astronomy, of the times, were only cultivated as the handmaids of
supersti­

tion: but the curiosity of the human mind must ultimately tend to its improve­

ment, and the encouragement of learning reflects the purest and most pleasing

lustre on the character of Charlemagne. (4) The dignity of his person,(5) the

length of his reign, the prosperity of his arms, the vigour of his governmept,
and

the reverence of distant nations, distinguish him from the royal crowd; and
Eu­

rope dates a new era from his restoration of the western empire.

That empire was not unworthy of its title;(6) and of some of the fairest king­

doms of Europe were the patrimony or conquest of a prince, who reigned at the

same time in France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and Hungary. (7) I. The Roman

province of Gaul, had been transformed into the name and monarchy of France;

but, in the decay of the Merovingian line, its limits were contracted by the
inde­

pendence of the Britons and the revolt of Aquitain. Charlemagne pursued, and

confined, the Britons on the shores of the ocean; and that ferocious tribe,
whose

origin and language are so different from the French, was chastised by the
impo­

sition of tribute, hostages, and peace. After a long and evasive conquest, the
re­

bellion of the dukes of Aquitain was punished by the forfeiture of their
province,

their liberty, and their lives. Harsh and rigorous would have been such
treatment

of ambitious governors, who had too faithfully copied the mayors of the
palace.

But a recent discovery(8) has proved that these unhappy princes were the last
and

(1) Yet Schmidt, from the best authorities, represent! the interior
disordersiml oppression of his reign.tHist.

ties A Demands, torn. ii. p. 45—49.)

(2) Omnis homo ex sua proprietate legitimam decimam ad ecclesiam conferat.
Experimento enim didici-

mus, in anno, quo ilia valida tames irrepsit, ebullire vacuas annonas a
demonibus devoratas, et voces exproba-

tionis audita*. Such is the decree and assertion of the great council of
Frankfort, (canon 25. torn. ix. p. 105.)

Both Selden (Hist, of Tithes; Works, vol. iii. part 2. p. 1146.) and
Montesquieu (Esprit des Loix, lib. xxxi. c.

13.) represents Charlemagne as the first legal author of tithes. Such
obligations have country gentlemen to

his memory!

(3) Eginhard (e. 25. p. 119.) clearly affirms, tentabat et scribere . .. . sed
parum proipere successit laltor

prsepostenis et sero inchoatus. The moderns have perverted and corrected this
obvious meaning, and the ti­

tle of M. Gaillard's Dissertation, (torn. iii. p. 247—260.) betrays his
partiality.

(4) See Gaillard, turn. Hi. p. 138—176. and Schmidt, torn. ii. p. 121—129.

(5) M. Gaillard (torn. iii. p. 372.) fixes the true stature of Charlemagne
(see a Dissertation of Marquard Fer-

her ad calcem Eginhard. p. 220, 8cc.) at five feet nine inches of French,
about six feet one inch and a fourth

English measure. The romance writers have increased it to eight feet, and the
giant was endowed with

matchless strength and appetite: at a tingle stroke of his good sword
Jtn/ei:te* he cut asunder a horseman and

his horse; at a single repast he devoured :» goose, two fowls, a quarter of
mutton, &c.

(6) See the concise, but correct and original work of d'Anville, (Etats formes
en Europe apres la Chute de

TEmpire Romain en Occident. Paris, 1771, in quarto,) whose map includes the
empire of Charlemagne: the

different parts are illustrated, by Vali-sius, (Notitia Gall:arum) for France,
Beretti (Dissertatio Chorographi-

ca) for Italy, de Marca (Marca Hispanica) for Spain. For the middle geography
of Germany, I confess my-

aelf poor and destitute.

(7) After a brief relation of his wars and conquests, (Vit. Carol, c. 5—14.)
Eginhard recapitulates, in a few_

words, (e. 15.) the countries subject to his empire. Struvius (Corpus Hist.
German, p. 118—149.) has inserted

in hit Notes the texts of the old Chronicles.

(8) Of a charter granted to the monastery of Alaon, (A. D. 845.) by Charles
the Bald, which deduces this

royal pedigree. I doubt whether some subsequent links of the ninth and tenth
centuries are equally firm;

*m the whole is approved and defended by M. Gaillard, (torn. ii. p. 64—81. 203—206.1 w ho affirms that the fa­  

