390 THE DECLINE AND FALL.

with this holy and meritorious perjury. (1) But the greatest part of the tem­

ples of Persia were ruined by the insensible and general desertion of their
vo­

taries. It was insensible, since it is not accompanied with any memorial of
time

or place, of persecution or resistance. It was general, since the whole realm,

from Shiraz to Samarcand, imbibed the faith of the Koran; and the preservation

of the native tongue reveals the descent of the Mahometans of Persia. (2) In
the

mountains and deserts, an obstinate race of unbelievers adhered to the
superstition

of their fathers; and a faint tradition of the Magian theology is kept alive
in the

province of Kirman, along the banks of the Indus, among the exiles of Surat,
and

in the colony which, in the last century, was planted by Shaw Abbas at the
gates

of Ispahan. The chief pontiff has retired to mount Elbourz, eighteen leagues
from

the city of Yezd; the perpetual fire (if it continue to burn) is inaccessible
to the

profane; but his residence is the school, the oracle, and the pilgrimage, of
the

Ghebers, whose hard and uniform features attest the unmingled purity of their

blood. Under the jurisdiction of their elders, eighty thousand families
maintain an

innocent and industrious life; their subsistence is derived from some curious
manu­

factures and mechanic trades; and they cultivate the earth with the fervour of
a

religious duty. Their ignorance withstood the despotism of Shaw Abbas, who de­

manded with threats and tortures the prophetic books of Zoroaster; and this
ob­

scure remnant of the Magians is spared by the moderation or contempt of their

present sovereigns. (3)

The northern coast of Africa is the only land in which the light of the
gospel,

after a long and perfect establishment, has been totally extinguished. The
arts,

which had been taught by Carthage and Rome, were involved in a cloud of igno­

rance; the doctrine of Cyprian and Augustin was no longer studied. Five
hundred

episcopal churches were overturned by the hostile fury of the Donatists, the
Van­

dals, the Moors. The zeal and numbers of the clergy declined; and the people,

without discipline or knowledge, or hope, submissively sunk under the yoke of
the

Arabian prophet. Within fifty years after the expulsion of the Greeks, a
lieute­

nant of Africa informed the caliph that the tribute of the infidels was
abolished by

their conversion,(4) and, though he sought to disguise his fraud and
rebellion, his

specious pretence was drawn from the rapid and extensive progress of the Maho­

metan faith. In the next age, an extraordinary mission of five bishops was de­

tached from Alexandria to Cairoan. They were ordained by the Jacobite
patriarch

to cherish and revive the dying embers of Christianity :(S) but the
interposition of

a foreign prelate, a stranger to the Latins, an enemy to the catholics,
supposes the

decay and dissolution of the African hierarchy. It was no longer the time when

the successor of St. Cyprian, at the head of a numerous synod, could maintain
an

equal contest with the ambition of the Roman pontiff. In the eleventh century,

the unfortunate priest who was seated on the ruins of Carthage, implored the
arms

and the protection of the Vatican; and he bitterly complains that his naked
body

had been scourged by the Saracens, and that his authority was disputed by the

four suffragans, the tottering pillars of his throne. Two epistles of Gregory
VII. (6)

are destined to sooth the distress of the catholics and the pride of a Moorish

prince. The pope assures the sultan that they both worship the same God, and

parts, was abbreviated in three volumes by his son Kondemir, A. H. 927. A. D.
1520. The two writers, matt.

accurately distinguished by Pf tit de la Croix, (Hist, de Genghizcan, p. S37.
538. 544. 545.) are loosely con­

founded by d'Herbelot: (p. 358. 410.994,995.) but his numerous extracts, under
the improper name of Khnn-

demir, belong to the father rather than the son. The historian of Genghizcan
refers to a MS. of Mirchond,

which he received from the hands of his friend d'Herbelot himself. A curious
fragment (the Tahcrian and

Soffarian Dynasties) has been lately published in Persic and Latin: (Viennae,
1782, in quarto, cum notis Ber­

nard de Jenisch) and the editor allows us to hope for a continuation of
Mirchond.

(1) Quo testimonio bonise quidpiam pratitisse opinabantur. Yet Mirchond must
have condemned their zeal,

since he approved the legal toleration of the Magi, cui (the Are temple)
peracto singulis annis censu, ut sacra

Mohammedis lege cautum, ab omnibus molestiis ac onenbus libero esse licuit.

(2) The last Magian of name and power appears to be Mardavige the Dillemite
who, in the beginning of the

tenth century, reigned in the northern provinces of Persia, near the Caspian
sea. (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient,

p 335.) But his soldiers and successors, the Mtrwides, either professed or
embraced the Mahometan faith; and

under their dynasty (A. D. 933—1020.) I should place the fall of the religion
of Zoroaster.

(3) The present state of the Ghebers in Persia is taken from Sir John Chardin,
not indeed the most learned,

but the most judicious and inquisitive, ofour modern travellers. (Voyages in
Perse, torn. ii. p. 109.179—187. in

quarto.) His brethren, Pietro de la Valle, Clearius Thevenot, Tavernier, &c.
whom I have fruitlessly searched,

bad neither eyes nor attention for this interesting people.

(4) The letter of Abdoulrahman, governor or tyrant of Africa, to the caliph
Aboul Abbas, the first of tlie

Abbassides, is dated A. H. 132. (Caitlonne, Hist, de I'Afrique et de
l'Espagne, torn. i. p. 168.)

(5) Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 66. Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p.
287,288.

(6) Among the Epistles ofthe Popes, see Leo IX. epist. 3. Gregor. VII. lib.
epist. 22,23. lib. iii. epist. 19—21.

and the criticisms of Fagi, (torn. iv. A. D. 1035. no. 13.) who investigates
the name and family of the Moorish

prince with whom the proudest ofthe Roman pomifTs so politely corresponds.

