OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1T9

Schirin,(l) her wit, her musical talents, are still famous in the history, or
rather

in the romances of the east: her own name is expressive, in the Persian
tongue, of

sweetness and grace; and the epithet of Parvis alludes to the charms of her
royal

lover. Yet Sira never shared the passion which she inspired, and the bliss of

Chosroes was tortured by a jealous doubt, that while he possessed her person,
she

had bestowed her affections on a meaper favourite. (2)

While the majesty of the Roman name was revived in the east, the prospect of

Europe is less pleasing and less glorious. By the departure of the Lombards,
and

the ruin of the Gepidsc, the balance of power was destroyed on the Danube; and

the Avars spread theirpermanent dominion from the foot of the Alps to the sea-

coast of the Euxine. The reign of Baian is the brightest era of their
monarchy;

their chagan, who occupied the rustic palace of Attila, appears to have
imitated

his character and policy;(3) but as the same scenes were repeated in a smaller
cir­

cle, a minute representation of the copy would be devoid of the greatness and
no­

velty of the original. The pride of the second Justin, of Tiberius, and
Maurice,

was humbled by a proud barbarian, more prompt to inflict, than exposed to
suffer

the injuries of war; and as often as Asia was threatened by the Persian arms,
Eu­

rope was oppressed by the dangerous inroads, or costly friendship of the
Avars.

When the Roman envoys approached the presence of the chagan, they were

commanded to wait at the door of his tent, till, at the end perhaps of ten or
twelve

days, he condescended to admit thera. If the substance or the style of their
mes­

sage was offensive to his ear, he insulted, with a real or affected fury,
their own

dignity, and that of their prince; their baggage was plundered, and their
lives

were only saved by the promise of a richer present and a more respectful
address.

But his sacred ambassadors enjoyed and abused an unbounded license in the
midst

of Constantinople: they urged with importunate clamours, the increase of
tribute,

or the restitution of captives and deserters; and the majesty of the empire
was al­

most equally degraded by a base compliance, or by the false and fearful
excuses,

with which they eluded such insolent demands. The chagan had never seen an

elephant; and his curiosity was excited by the strange, and perhaps fabulous,
por­

trait of that wonderful animal. At his command, one of the largest elephants
of

the imperial stables was equipped with stately caparisons, and conducted by a

numerous train to the royal village in the plains of Hungary. He surveyed the

enormous beast with surprise, with disgust, and possibly with terror; and
smiled

at the vain industry of the Romans, who, in search of such useless rarities,
could

explore the limits of the land and sea. He wished, at the expense of the
emperor,

to repose in a golden bed. The wealth of Constantinople, and the skilful
diligence

of her artists, were instantly devoted to the gratification of his caprice;
but when

the work was finished, he rejected with scorn a present so unworthy the
majesty

of a great king. (4) These were the casual sallies of his pride, but the
avarice of

the chagan was a more steady and tractable passion; a rich and regular supply
of

silk apparel, furniture, and plate, introduced the rudiments of art and luxury

among the tents of the Scythians; their appetite was stimulated by the pepper
and

cinnamon of India;(5) the annual subsidy or tribute was raised from fourscore
to

one hundred and twenty thousand pieces of gold; and after each hostile
interrup-

(1) The Greeks only describe her as a Roman by birth, a Christian by religion;
but she is represented as

the daughter of the emperor Maurice in the Persian and Turkish Romances, which
celebrate the lore of

Khosrou for Schirin, of Schirin for Ferhad, the most beautiful youth of the
east. D'Herbelot, Bibtiolh. Ori­

ental, p. 789. 097,998.

(2) The whole series of the tyranny of Hormouz, the revolt of Bahram, and the
flight and restoration of

Chosroes, is related by two cotemporary Greeks—more concisely by Evagrius,
(lib. vs. c. 10—19.)—and most

diffusely by Theophylact Simocatta: (lib. iii. c. vi.—18. lib. iv. c. 1—IS.
lib. v. c. 1—1 J.) succeeding compilers,

Zonaras and Cedrenus, can only transcribe and abridge. The Christian Arabs
Eutychtus, (Annak torn. ii. p.

200—208.) and Abulpharagius, (Dynast, p. 96—98.) appear to have consulted some
particular memoirs. The

great Persian historians of the fifteenth century, Mirkhond and Khondemir, are
only known to me by the im­

perfect extracts of Sbikark, (Tarikh, p. 150—lis.) Texeira, or rather Stevens,
(Hist, of Persia, p. 182—188.) a

Turkish MS. translated by the abbe Fourmont, (Hist, de I'Academie des
Inscriptions, torn. vii. p. 325—334.)

and d'Herbelot,(anx mots, Hormouz, p. 457—459. Bahram, p. 174. Kliosrou
Parviz, p. 996. Were I perfect­

ly satisfied of their authority. I could wish these oriental materials had
been more copious.

(3) A general idea of the pride and power of the chagan may be taken from
Mrnander, (Excerp. Legat. p.

117, &c. and Theophylact, lib. i. c. 3. lib. vii.c. IS.) whose eight books are
much more honourable to the Avar

than to the Roman prince. The predecessors of Baian had tasted the liberality
of Rome, and he survived

the reign of Maurice, (Bunt, Hist, des Peuples Barbares, torn. it. p. 54S.)
The chagan who invaded Italy, A.

J). 611.(Muratori, Annali. torn. v. p. 305.) was then juvenili setate
florentem, (Paul Warnefrid.de Geit Lan-

gobard, lib. v. c. 38.) the son, perhaps, or the grandson of Baian.

M) Theophylact, lib. i. c. 5,6. .

(5) Even in the field, the chagan delighted in the use of these aromaties. He
solicited as a gift. Mum;

.xapuz**;, and received twrtpt Kxt qvkkov Iv&ui-, xxtnxo rt scat tck
/.eyo^svoi/ xsarov. Theophylact, lib. vii. CIS.

The Europeans of the ruder ages consumed more spices in their meat and drink
than is compatible with the

.delicacy of a modern palate. Vie Priee des Francois, torn. ri. p. 162,163.

