OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

unknown to the Asiatics;(l) they are ignorant of the laws of criticism; and
oui*

monkish chronicles of the same period may be compared to their most popular

works, which are never verified by the spirit of philosophy and freedom, The

oriental library of a Frenchman(2) would instruct the most learned mufti of
the

east; and perhaps the Arabs might not find in a single historian, so clear and
com­

prehensive a narrative of their own exploits, as that which will be deduced in
the

ensuing sheets-

I. In the first year of the first caliph, his lieutenant Caled, the sword of
God,

and the scourge of the infidels, advanced to the banks of the Euphrates, and
re­

duced the cities of Anbar and Hira. Westward of the ruins of Babylon, a tribe

of sedentary Arabs had fixed themselves on the verge of the desert; and Hira
was

the seat of a race of kings who had embraced the Christian religion, and
reigned

above six hundred years under the shadow of the throne of Persia. (3) The last

of the Mondars was defeated and slain by Caled: his son was sent a captive to
Me­

dina; his nobles bowed before the successor of the prophet: the people were

tempted by the example and success of their countrymen; and the caliph
accepted

as the first fruits of foreign conquest, an annual tribute of seventy thousand
pieces

of gold. The conquerors, and even their historians, were astonished by the
dawn

of their future greatness. "In the same year," says Elmacin, "Caled fought

many signal battles; an immense multitude of the infidels were slaughtered;
and

spoils, infinite and innumerable, were acquired by the victorious Moslems.
"(4)

But the invincible Caled was soon transferred to the Syrian war: the invasion
of

the Persian frontier was conducted by less active or less prudent commanders:
the

Saracens were repulsed with loss in the passage of the Euphrates; and, though

they chastised the insolent pursuit of the Magians, their remaining forces
still ho­

vered in the desert of Babylon.

The indignation and fears of the Persians suspended for a moment their intes­

tine divisions. By the unanimous sentence of the priests and nobles, their
queen

Arzema was deposed; the sixth of the transient usurpers, who had arisen and
va­

nished in three or four years, since the death of Chosroes and the retreat of
He-

raclius. Her tiara was placed on the head of Vezdegerd, the grandson of Chos­

roes; and the same era, which coincides with an astronomical period,(5) has
re­

corded the fall of the Sassanian dynasty and the religion of Zoroaster. (6)
The youth

and inexperience of the prince, he was only fifteen years of age, declined a
peri­

lous encounter; the royal standard was delivered into the hands of his general

Rustam; and a remnant of thirty thousand regular troops was swelled in truth,
or

in opinion, to one hundred and twenty thousand subjects, or allies of the
great

king. The Moslems, whose numbers were re-enforced from twelve to thirty

thousand, had pitched their camp in the plains of Cadesia:(7) and their line,

Cregorio Abulpharagio, interprete Edviardo Pocorkio. in quarto. Oxen. 1663;
more useful for the literary than

the civil history of the east. 4. Abulfedce Annates Mosleniki ad Ann, Hegira
406. a Jo. Tor. Rciske, in quarto.

Lituia:, 1754; the best of our chronicles, both for the original and version;
yet how far below the name of

Abulfeda! We know that he wrote at Hamah, in the fourteenth century. The three
former were Christians

of the tenth, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries; the two first, natives of
Egypt; a Melchite patriarch, and a Ja­

cobite scribe.

(1) M. de Guignes (Hist, des Hum, torn. i. pref. xix. m.) has characterised,
with truth and knowledge, the

two sorts of Arabian historians, the dry annalist, and the tumid and flowery
orator.

(2) Bibliolheque Orientate, par M. (THerbelot, in folio, Paris, 1697. For.the
character of the respectable au­

thor, consult his friend Thevenot (Voyages du Levant, part 1. chap. 50.) His
work is an agreeable miscellany,

which must gratify every taste; but I never can digest the alphabetical order,
and I find him more satisfactory

in toe Persian than the Arabic history. The recent supplement from the papers
of M. M. Visdelou and Gaf-

lond (in folio, La Haye, 177°) is of a different case, a medley of tales,
proverbs, and Chinese antiquities.

(3) Pocock will explain the chronology (Specimen Hist. Arabum. p. 66. 7-1.)
and d'Anville the geography

'Enphrate et le Tigre, p. 125.,) of the dynasty of the Almondars. The English
scholar understood more Ara-

ic than the mufti of Aleppo (Ockley, vol. ii. p. 34.:) the French geographer
is equally at home in every age

and every climate of the world.

(4) Fecit et Cbaled plurima in hoc ano prcelia, in quibus vicerunt Muslimi, et
infldeliam immensa multitu-

dine occisa spolia infinita et innumera sunt nacti (Hist. Saracenica, p. 20.)
The Chiistian annalist slides into

the national and compendious term of infidels, and 1 often adopt (I hope
without scandal) this characteristic

mode of ex pression.

(5) A cycle of one hundred and twenty years, the end of which an intercalary
month of thirty days, supplied

the use of our bissextile, and restored the integrity of the solar year. In a
great revolution of one thousand

four hundred and forty years, this intercalation was successively removed from
the first to the twelfth month;

but Hyde and Freret are involved ir, a profound controversy, whether the
twelve, or only eight of these changes,

were accomplished before the era of Yezdegerd, which is unanimously fixed to
the 16th of June, A. D. 632. How

laboriously does the curious spirit of Europe explore the darkest and most
distant antiquities! (Hyde, de Reli.

gione Pertarum, c. xiv—xviif. p. 181—211. Freret in the Mem. de l'Academie des
Inscriptions, torn. xvi. p.

233—267.)

(6) Nine days after the death of Mahomet (7th June, A. D. 632.) we find the
era of Yezdegerd (16th June, A.

D. 632.;) and his accession cannot be postponed beyond the end of the first
year. His predecessors could noc

therefore resist the arms of the caliph Omar, and these unquestionable dates
overthrow the thoughtless chrono­

logy of Abulpharagius. See Ockley's Hist, of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 130.

(7) Cadesia, says the Nubian geographer (p. 121.) is in roargine solitudinis,
sixty-one leagues from Bagdad,

