78 THE DECLINE AND FALL

of the Sogdoites; the emperor renounced or seemed to renounce, the fugitive
Avars,

but he accepted the alliance of the Turks; and the ratification of the treaty
was

carried by a Roman minister to the foot of mount Altai. Under the successors

of Justinian, the friendship of the two nations was cultivated by frequent and
cor­

dial intercourse: the most favoured vassals were permitted to imitate the
example

of the great khan, and one hundred and six Turks, who, on various occasions,
had

visited Constantinople, departed at the same time for their native country.
The

duration and length of the journey from the Byzantine court to mount Altai,
are

not specified: it might have been difficult to mark a road through the
nameless de­

serts, the mountains, rivers, and morasses of Tartary; but a curious account
has

been preserved of the reception of the Roman ambassadors at the royal camp.

After they had been purified with fire and incense, according to a rite still
prac­

tised under the sons of Zingis, they were introduced to the presence of
Disabul.

In a valley of the Golden Mountain, they found the great khan in his tent,
seated

in a chair with wheels, to which a horse might be occasionally harnessed. As
soon

as they had delivered their presents, which were received by their proper
officers,

they exposed, in a florid oration, the wishes of the Roman emperor, that
victory

might attend the arms of the Turks, that their reign might be long and
prosperous,

and that a strict alliance, without envy or deceit, might for ever be
maintained be­

tween the two most powerful nations of the earth. The answer of Disabul cor­

responded with these friendly professions, and the ambassadors were seated by

his side, at a banquet which lasted the greatest part of the day: the tent was
sur­

rounded with silk hangings, and a Tartar liquor was served on the table, which

possessed at least the intoxicating qualities of wine. The entertainment of
the

succeeding day was more sumptuous; the silk hangings of the second tent were

embroidered in various figures; and the royal seat, the cups, and the vases,
were

of gold. A third pavilion was supported by columns of gilt wood; a bed of pure

and massy gold was raised on four peacocks of the same metal; and before the
en­

trance of the tent, dishes, basins, and statues of solid silver, and admirable
art,

were ostentatiously piled in wagons, the monuments of valour rather than of
in­

dustry. When Disabul led his armies against the frontiers of Persia, his Roman

allies followed many days the march of the Turkish camp, nor were they dis­

missed till they had enjoyed their precedency over the envoy of the great
king,

whose loud and intemperate clamours interrupted the silence of the royal
banquet.

The power and ambition of Chosroes cemented the union of the Turks and Ro­

mans, who touched his dominions on either side: but those distant nations,
regard­

less of each other, consulted the dictates of interest, without recollecting
the ob­

ligations of oaths and treaties. While the successor of Disabul celebrated his
fa­

ther's obsequies, he was saluted by the ambassadors of the emperor Tiberius,
who

proposed an invasion of Persia, and sustained with firmness, the angry and
per­

haps the just, reproaches of that haughty barbarian. "You see my ten fingers

(said the great khan, and he applied them to his mouth.) You Romans speak

with as many tongues, but they are tongues of deceit and perjury. To me you

hold one language, to my subjects another: and the nations are successively
de­

luded by your perfidious eloquence. You precipitate your allies into war and
dan­

ger, you enjoy their labours, and you neglect your benefactors. Hasten'your
re­

turn, inform your master that a Turk is incapable of uttering or forgiving
false­

hood, and that he shall speedily meet the punishment which he deserves. While

he solicits my friendship with flattering and hollow words, he is sunk to a
confe­

derate of my fugitive Varchonites. If I condescend to march against those

contemptible slaves, they will tremble at the sound of our whips; they will be

trampled, like a nest of ants, under the feet of my innumerable cavalry. I am
not

ignorant of the road which they have followed to invade your empire; nor can I

he deceived by the vain pretence, that mount Caucasus is the impregnable
barrier

of the Romans. I know the course of the Niester, the Danube, and the Hebrus,

the most warlike nations have yielded to the arms of the Turks; and from the

rising to the setting sun the earth is my inheritance." Notwithstanding this
me­

nace, a sense of mutual advantage soon renewed the alliance of the Turks and
Ro­

mans: but the pride of the great khan survived his resentment: and when he an­

nounced an important conquest to his friend the emperor Maurice, he styled
him­

self the master of the seven races, and the lord of the seven climates of the

world. (1)

CD All the details of these Turkish anil Roman embassies, so curious in the
history of human manners, are

