OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. . 393

t»f the present hour, who strives to follow the rapid course of the Saracens,
must

study to explain by what means the church and state were saved from this im­

pending, and, as it should seem, from this inevitable danger. The deserts of
Scy-

thia and Sarmatia might be guarded by their extent, their climate, their
poverty,

and the courage of the northern shepherds; China was remote and inaccessible;

but the greatest part of the temperate zone was subject to the Mahometan con­

querors, the Greeks were exhausted by the calamities of war and the loss of
their

fairest provinces, and the barbarians of Europe might justly tremble at the
preci­

pitate fall of the Gothic monarchy. In this inquiry I shall unfold the events
that

rescued our ancestors of Britain, and our neighbours of Gaul, from the civil
and

religious yoke of the Koran; ihat protected the majesty of Home, and delayed
the

servitude of Constantinople; that invigorated the defence of the Christians,
and

scattered among their enemies the seeds of division and decay.

Forty-six years after the flight of Mahomet from Mecca, his disciples appeared

in arms under the walls of Constantinople. (1) They were animated by a genuine

or fictitious saying of the prophet, that, to the first army which besieged
the city

of the Csesarsj their sins were forgiven; the long series of the Roman
triumphs

would be meritoriously transferred to the conquerors of new Rome; and the
wealth

of nations was deposited in this well-chosen seat of royalty and commerce. No

sooner had the caliph Moawiyah suppressed his rivals and established his
throne,

than he aspired to expiate the guilt of civil blood, by the success and glory
of his

holy expedition ;(2) his preparations by sea and land were adequate to the
import­

ance of the object; his standard was intrusted to Sophian, a veteran warrior,
but

the troops were encouraged by the example and presence of Yezid, the son and

Sresumptive heir of the commander of the faithful. The Greeks had little to

ope, nor had their enemies any reasons to fear, from the courage and vigilance
of

the reigning emperor, who disgraced the name of Constantine, and imitated only

the inglorious years of his grandfather Heraclius. Without delay or
opposition,

the naval forces of the Saracens passed through the unguarded channel of the

Hellespont, which even now, under the feeble and disorderly government of the

Turks, is maintained as the natural bulwark of the capital.(3) The Arabian

, fleet cast anchor, and the troops were disembarked near the palace of
Hebdomcn,

seven miles from the city. During many days, from the dawn of light to the
eve­

ning, the line of assault was extended from the golden gate to the eastern
promon­

tory, and the foremost warriors were impelled by the weight and effort of the
suc­

ceeding columns. But the beseigers had formed an insufficient estimate of the

strength and resources of Constantinople. The solid and lofty walls were
guarded

by numbers and discipline: the spirit of the Romans was rekindled by the last
dan­

ger of their religion and empire: the fugitives from the conquered provinces
more

successfully renewed the defence of Damascus and Alexandria; and the Saracens

• were dismayed by the strange and prodigious effects of artificial fire- This
firm

and effectual resistance diverted their arms to the more easy attempts of
plundering

the European and Asiatic coasts of the Propontis; and, after keeping the sea
from

the month of April to that of September, on the approach of winter they
retreated

fourscore miles from the capital, to the isle of Cyzicus, in which they had
established

their magazine of spoil and provisions. So patient was their perseverance, or
so

languid were their operations, that they repeated, in the six following
summers,

the same attack and retreat, with a gradual abatement of hope and vigour, till
the

mischances of shipwreck and disease, of the sword and of fire, compelled them

to relinquish the fruitless enterprise. They might bewail the loss, or
commemo­

rate the martyrdom, of thirty thousand Moslems, who fell in the siege of
Constan­

tinople; and the solemn funeral of Abu Ayub, or Job, excited the curiosity of
the

Christians themselves. That venerable Arab, one of the last of the companions

(1) Theophanes placet the teven years of the siege of Constantinople in the
year of our Christian era 673 (of

the Alexandrian 695, Sept. 1.) and the peace of the Saracens, four years
afterward; a glaring inconsistency!

which Petaviua, Guar, and Pagi (Critica, torn. iv. p. 63,64.) have struggled
to remove. Of the Arabians, the

Hegira 52 (A. D. 672, January 8,) is assigned by Elrnacin, the year 48, (A. D.
668, Feb. 20.) by Abulfeda, whose

testimony 1 esteem the most convenient and creditable.

(3) For this first siege ot Constantinople, set; Nicephorus (Breviar. p.
21,22.) Tlirophanes (Chronograph, p.

294.) Cedrenus (Compend. p. 437.) Zonaras (Hist. torn. ii. lib. 14. p. 8y.)
Einstein, (Hist. Saracen, p. 56,57.)

Abulfeda (Annal. Moslem, p. 127, 128. vers. Reiske.) d'Herbelot (Bibiiot.
Orient. Ctuistantinah,) Oekk'y's His-

tory of the Saracens, vol. ii. p. 127,128.

(3) The state and defence of the Dardanelles is exposed in the Memoires of the
Baron de Tott, (torn. iii. p. Jo.

—97.) who was sent to fortify them against the Russians. From a principal
actor, I should have expected more

accurate details; but he seems to write for the amusement, rather than the
instruction, of his reader. Perhaps,

on the approaoh of the enemy, the minister of Constantine was occupied, like
that of Mustapha, in finding two

Canary birth, who should sing precisely the lame note.

Vol. HI. 50

