804 THE DECLINE AND FALL

From the northern point of Beles,(l) on the Euphrates, a line of fifteen
hundred

miles is terminated by the straits of Babelmandel and the land of
frankincense,

About half this length may be allowed for the middle breadth from east to
west,

from Bassorato Suez, from the Persian gulf to the Red Sea. (2) The sides of

the triangle are gradually enlarged, and the southern basin presents a front
of a

thousand miles to the Indian ocean. The entire surface of the peninsula
exceeds

in a fourfold proportion that of Germany or France; but the far greater part
has

been justly stigmatized with the epithets of the stony and the sandy. Even the

wilds of Tartary are decked by the hand of nature with lofty trees and
luxuriant

herbage; and the lonesome traveller derives a sort of comfort and society from
the

presence of vegetable life. But in the dreary waste of Arabia, a boundless
level of

sand is intersected by sharp and naked mountains, and the face of the desert,

without shade or shelter, is scorched by the direct and intense rays of a
tropical

sun. Instead of refreshing breezes, the winds, particularly from the south-
west,

diffuse a noxious and even deadly vapour; the hillocks of sand, which they
alter­

nately raise and scatter, are compared to the billows of the ocean, and whole
ca­

ravans, whole armies, have been lost and buried in the whirlwind. The common

benefits of water are an object of desire and contest; and such is the
scarcity of

wood, that some art is requisite to preserve and propagate the element of
fire.

Arabia is destitute of navigable rivers, which fertilize the soil, and convey
its pro­

duce to the adjacent regions: the torrents that fall from the hills are
imbibed by

the thirsty earth: the rare and hardy plants, the tamarind or the acacia, that
strike

their roots into the clefts of the rocks, are nourished by the dews of the
night; a

scanty supply of rain is collected in cisterns and aqueducts; the wells and
springs

are the secret treasure of the desert; and the pilgrim of Mecca,(3) after many

a dry and sultry march, is disgusted by the taste of the waters, which have

rolled over a bed of sulphur or salt. Such is the general and genuine picture

of the climate of Arabia. The experience of evil enhances the value of any
local

or partial enjoyments. A shady grove, a green pasture, a stream of fresh
water,

are sufficient to attract a colony of sedentary Arabs to the fortunate spots
which

can afford food and refreshment to themselves and their cattle, and which
encou­

rage their industry in the cultivation of the palm-tree and the vine. The high

lands that border on the Indian ocean are distinguished by their superior
plenty of

wood and water; the air is more temperate, the fruits are more delicious, the
ani­

mals and the human race more numerous: the fertility of the soil invites and
re­

wards the toil of the husbandman; and the peculiar gifts of frankincense,(4)
and

coffee have attracted in different ages the merchants of the world. If it be
com­

pared with the rest of the peninsula, this sequestered region may truly
deserve the

appellation of the happy: and the splendid colouring of fancy and fiction has
been

suggested by contrast and countenanced by distance. It was for this earthly
pa­

radise that nature had reserved her choicest favours and her most curious
work­

manship: the incompatible blessings of luxury and innocence were ascribed to
the

natives: the soil was impregnated with gold(5) and gems, and both the land and

sea were taught to exhale the odours of aromatic sweets. This division of the

sandy, the stony, and the happy, so familiar to the Greeks and Latins, is
unknown

to the Arabians themselves: and it is singular enough, that a country, whose
lan­

guage and inhabitants have ever been the same, should scarcely retain a
vestige of

its ancient geography. The maritime districts of Bahrein and Oman are oppo-

ribus Notus, and Ire Partie de I'Asie) should lie before the reader with his
Geographie Aneienne, torn. ii. p.

208—231.

(1) Abulfed. Rescript. Arabia:, p. 1. D'Anville, PEuphrate et le Tigre, p.
19.20. It was in this place, the

paradise or garden of a satrap, that Xenophon and the Greeks first passed the
Euphrates. (Anabasis, lib. i. c.

10. p. 29. edit. Wells.)

(2) Reland has proved, with much superfluous learning. 1. That our Red Sea,
(the Arabian gulf) is not

more than a part of the Mare Rubrum,tbe EpwSp« &*\*<rtrti of the ancients,
which was extended to the indefinite

space of the Indian ocean. 2. That the synonymous words spuSpoj oetfiioi}/;,
alluded to the colour of the blacks

or negroes. (Dissert. Miscell. torn. i. p. 891—617.)

(3) In the thirty days or stations, between Cairo and Mecca, there are fifteen
destitute of good water. See

the route of the Hadjees, in Shaw's Travels, p. 477.

(4) The aromatic, especially the thus or frankincense of Arabia, occupy the
twelfth book of Pliny. Oar

great poet (Paradise Lost. lib. iv.) introduces, in a simile, the spicy odours
that are blown by the north-east

wind from the Sabcean coast:—

Many a league,

Pleas'd with the grateful scent, old Ocean smiles.

(Plin. Hist. Natur. xii.42.)

(5) Agatharcides affirms, that lumps of pure gold were found, from the size of
an olive to that of a put;

that iron was twice, and silver ten times the value of gold, (de Man Rubra, p.
60.) These real or imaginary

treasures are vanished; and no gold mines arc at present known in Arabia.
(Niebuhr, Description, p. 124,)

