OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

fleet and army into the Adriatic gulf. After suffering from the winds and
waves

much loss and delay, the Greeks made their descent in the neighbourhood of Ra­

venna: they threatened to depopulate the guilty capital, and to imitate,
perhaps to

surpass, the example of Justinian II., who had chastised a former rebellion by
the

choice and execution of fifty of the principal inhabitants. The women and
clergy,

in sackcloth and ashes, lay prostrate in prayer; the men were in arms for the
de­

fence of their country; the common danger had united the factions, and the
event

of a battle was preferred to the slow miseries of a siege. In a hard-fought
day, as

the two armies alternately yielded and advanced, a phantom was seen, a voice
was

he.ard, and Ravenna was victorious by the assurance of victory. The strangers

retreated to their ships, but the populous sea-coast poured forth a multitude
of

boats; the waters of the Po were so deeply infected with blood, that during
six

years, the public prejudice abstained from the fish of the river: and the
institution

of an annual feast perpetuated the worship of images, and the abhorrence of
the

Greek tyrant. Amidst the triumph of the catholic arms, the Roman pontiff con­

vened a synod of ninety-three bishops against the heresy of the Iconoclasts.
With

their consent he pronounced a general excommunication against all who by word

or deed should attack the tradition of the fathers and the images of the
saints; in

this sentence the emperor was tacitly involved,(l) but the vote of a last and
hope­

less remonstrance may seem to imply that the anathema was yet suspended over

his guilty head. No sooner had they confirmed their own safety, the worship of

images, and the freedom of Rome and Italy, than the popes appear to have
relaxed

of their severity, and to have spared the relics of the Byzantine dominion.
Their

moderate counsels delayed and prevented the election of a new emperor, and
they

exhorted the Italians not to separate from the body of the Roman monarchy. The

exarch was permitted to reside within the walls of Ravenna, a captive rather

than a master; and till the imperial coronation of Charlemagne,"the government
of

Rome and Italy was exercised in the name of the successors of Constantine.(2)

The liberty of Rome, which had been oppressed by the arms and arts of Au­

gustus, was rescued, after seven hundred and fifty years of servitude, from
the

persecution of Leo the IsaUrian. By the Cscsars, the triumphs, of the consuls
had

been annihilated: in the decline and fall of the empire, the God Terminus, the

sacred boundary, had insensibly receded from the ocean, the Rhine, the Danube,

and the Euphrates; and Rome was reduced to her ancient territory from Viterbo

to Xerracina, and from Narni to the mouth of the Tiber. (3) When the kings

were banished, the republic reposed on the firm basis which had been founded
by

their wisdom and virtue. Their perpetual jurisdiction was divided between two

annual magistrates; the senate continued to exercise the powers of
administration

and counsel; and the legislative authority was distributed in the assemblies
of the

people, by a well-proportioned scale of property and service. Ignorant of the

arts of luxury, the primitive Romans had improved the science of government

and war: the will of the community was absolute; the rights of individuals
were

sacred; one hundred and thirty thousand citizens were armed for defence or

conquest; and a band of robbers and outlaws was moulded into a nation, deserv­

ing of freedom, and ambitious of glory. (4) When the sovereignty of the Greek

emperors was extinguished, the ruins of Rome presented the sad image of de­

population and decay; her slavery was a habit, her liberty an accident; the
ef­

fect of superstition, and the object of her own amazement and terror. The last

vestige of the substance, or even the forms, of the constitution, was
obliterated

from the practice and memory of the Romans; and they were devoid of knowledge,

or virtue, again to build the fabric of a commonwealth. Their scanty remnant,

(1) Yet Leo was undoubtedly comprised in the siquis imagtnum sacrartim
destructor ....

extiterit sit extorris a corpore I). N. Jesu Christi vel totius ecclesisc
unitatc. The canonists may decide whether

the guilt or the name constitutes the excommunicatiou; and the decision is of
the last importance to their safe­

ty, since, according to the oracle, (Gratian Caus. 23. p. 5. c. 47. apud
Spanheim, Hist. Imag. p. 112.) homicidas

non esse qui excommunicato* trucidant.

(2) Compescuit tale consilium Pontifex, sperans conversionem principis.
(Anastas. p. 15ft.) Sed ne desiste-

rent ab amore et fide R. J. admonehat (p. 1 *7.) The popes style Leo and
Constantine Corpronymus, Impcra-

tores et Domini, with the strange epithet of Piissimi. A famous mosaic of the
Lateran (A. 0. 798.) repre­

sents Christ, who delivers the keys to St. Peter and the banner to Constantine
V. (Muraton, Annali d'ltalia,

torn. vs. p. 337.)

(3) I have traced the Roman duchy according to the maps, and the maps
according to the excellent disserta­

tion of father Baretti. (de Chorographia Italia; Medii *5>i.sect. 20. p.
216—232.) Yet I must nicely observe,

that Viterbo is of Lombard foundation, (p. 211.) and that Terracina was
usurped by the Greeks.

(4) On the extent, population, &e. of the Roman kingdom, the reader may peruse
with pleasure the Viscours

Prelimhmire to the RepubliqueRomaine of M. de Beaufort (torn. i.;) who will
not be accused of too much

credulity for the early ages of Rome.

