THE DECLINE AND FALL

IV. The conquest of Africa, from the Nile to the Atlantic ocean,(l) was first

attempted by the arms of the caliph Othman. The pious design was approved by

the companions of Mahomet and the chiefs of the tribes; and twenty thousand

Arabs marched from Medina, with the gifts and the blessings of the commander

of the faithful. They were joined in the camp of Memphis by twenty thousand of

their countrymen: and the conduct of the war,was intmsted to Abdallah,(2) the

son of Said, and the foster-brother of the caliph, who had lately supplanted
the

conqueror and lieutenant of Egypt. Yet the favour of the prince, and the merit

of his favourite, could not obliterate the guilt of his apostacy. The early
con­

version of Abdallah, and his skilful pen, had recommended him to the important

office of transcribing the sheets of the Koran; he betrayed his trust,
corrupted the

text, derided the errors which he had made, and fled to Mecca, to escape the

justice, and expose the ignorance, of the apostle. After the conquest of
Mecca, he

fell prostrate at the feet of Mahomet: his tears, and the entreaties of
Othman, ex­

torted a reluctant pardon; but the prophet declared that he had so long
hesitated,

to allow time for some zealous disciple to avenge his injury in the blood of
the

apostate. With apparent fidelity, and effective merit, he served the religion

which it was no longer his interest to desert: his birth and talents gave him
an

honourable rank among the Koreish; and in a nation of cavalry, Abdallah was
re­

nowned as the boldest and most dexterous horseman of Arabia. At the head of

forty thousand Moslems, he advanced from Egypt into the unknown countries of

the west. The sands of Barca might be impervious to a Roman legion; but the

Arabs were attended by their faithful camels; and the natives of the desert
beheld

without terror the familiar aspect of the soil and climate. After a painful

march, they pitched their tents before the walls of Tripoli,(3) a maritime
city in

which the name, the wealth, and the inhabitants, of the province had gradually

centred, and which now maintains the third rank among the states of Barbary.

A re-enforcement of Greeks was surprised and cut in pieces on the sea-shore;
but

the fortifications of Tripoli resisted the first assaults; and the Saracens
were tempt­

ed, by the approach of the prefect Gregory, (4) to relinquish the labours of
the

siege for the perils and the hopes of a decisive action. If his standard was
fol­

lowed by one hundred and twenty thousand men, the regular bands of the empire

must have been lost in the naked and disorderly crowd of Africans and Moors,

who formed the strength, or rather the numbers, of his host. He rejected with

indignation the option of the Koran or the tribute; and during several days,
the

two armies were fiercely engaged from the dawn of light to the hour of noon,
when

their fatigue and the excessive heat compelled them to seek shelter and
refresh­

ment in their respective camps. The daughter of Gregory, a maid of
incomparable

beauty and spirit, is said to have fought by his side: from her earliest youth
she

was trained to mount on horseback, to draw the bow, and to wield the scimitar:

and the richness of her arms and apparel was conspicuous in the foremost ranks

of the battle. Her hand, with a hundred thousand pieces of gold, was offered
for

the head of the Arabian general, and the youths of Africa were excited by the

prospect of the glorious prize. At the pressing solicitation of his brethren,
Abdal­

lah withdrew his person from the field; but the Saracens were discouraged by
the

retreat of their leader, and the repetition of these equal or unsuccessful
conflicts.

A noble Arabian, who afterwards became the adversary of Ali and the father

knowledge is collected hyAbutfeda, (Descript. Egypt. Arab, et Lat. a. .Toh.
David Michaelis, Gcttings, in

quarto, 1776.) ami in two recent voyages into Egypt, we are amused by Savary,
and instructed by Volney. I

wish the latter could travel over the globe.

(1) My conquest of Africa is drawn from two French interpreters of Arabic
literature, Cardonne, (Hist, de

I'Afrique et de l'Espagne sous la Domination des Arabes, torn. i. p. 8—55.)
and Otter. (Hist, de I'Academie des

Inscriptions, torn. xxi. p. Ill—125. and 136.) They derive their principal
information from Novairi, who com­

posed, A. D. 1331, an Encyclopedia in more than twenty volumes. The five
general parts successively treat of,

1. Phvsics, 2. Man, 3. Animals, 4. Plants, and 5. History: and the A frimn
affairs are discussed in the sixth chap­

ter of the fifth section of this last part. (Reiske, Prodidagmata ad Hagji
Clialifse Tabulas, p. 232—234.) Among

the older historians who are quoted by Novairi, we may distinguish the
original narrative of a soldier who let] the

van of the Moslems.

(2) Seethe history or Abdallah, in Abulfeda (Vit. Mohammed, p. 109.) and
Gagnier. Viede Mahomet, torn,

iii. p. 45—48.)

(3) The province and city of Tripoli are described by Leo Africanus (in
Navigationc et Viaggi di Rammio

torn. i. Venetia, 1550, fol. 76. vrrto) and Marmot. (Description de 1'Afriqne,
torn. ii. p. 562.) The first of these

writers was a Moor, a scholar and a traveller, who composed or translated his
African geography in a state of

captivity at Rome, where he had assumed ttie n*me and religion of Pope LeoX.
In a similar captivity among

the Moors, the Spaniard Marmol, a soldier of Charles V. compiled his
description of Africa, translated by d'Ab-

Inncourt into French (Paris, 1667, three vols, in quarto,) Marmol had read and
seen, but he is destitute of the

curious and extensive observations which abound in the original work of Leo
the African.

(4) Theopbanes, who mentions the defeat, rather than the death, of Gregory. He
brands the prefect with

the name of Tupxvmt; he had probably assumed the purple. (Chronograph, p.
285.)

