THE DECLINE AND FALL

faithful natives devoted their labours to the service of Amrou; some sparks of

martial spirit were perhaps rekindled by the example of their allies; and the

sanguine hopes of Mokawkas had fixed his sepulchre in the church of St. John
of

Alexandria. Eutychius the patriarch observes, that the Saracens fought with

the courage of lions; they repulsed the frequent and almost daily sallies of
the be­

sieged, and soon assaulted in their turn the walls and towers of the city. In
eve­

ry attack, the sword, the banner of Amrou, glittered in the van of the
Moslems.

On a memorable day, he was betrayed by his imprudent valour: his followers

who had entered the city were driven back; and the general, with a friend and
a

slave, remained a prisoner in the hands of the Christians. When Amrou was

conducted before the prefect, he remembered his dignity and forgot his
situation:

a lofty demeanour, and resolute language, revealed the lieutenant of the
caliph,

and the battle-axe of a soldier was already raised to strike off the head of
the

audacious captive. His life was saved by the readiness of his slave, who
instant­

ly gave his master a blow on the face, and commanded him, with an angry tone,

to be silent in the presence of his superiors. The credulous Greek was
deceived;

he listened to the offers of a treaty, and his prisoners were dismissed in the
hope

of a more respectable embassy, till the joyful acclamations of the.camp
announced

the return of their general, and insulted the folly of the infidels. At
length, after

a siege of fourteen nionths,(l) and the loss of three-and-twenty thousand men,

the Saracens^prevailed: the Greeks embarked their dispirited and diminished

numbers, and the standard of Mahomet was planted on the walls of the capital
of

Egypt. *' I have taken," said Amrou to the caliph, " the great city of the
west.

It'is impossible for me to enumerate the variety of its riches and beauty; and
I

shall content myself with observing, that it contains four thousand palaces,
four

thousand baths, four hundred theatres or places of amusement, twelve thousand

shops for the sale of vegetable food, and forty thousand tributary Jews. The

town has been subdued by force of arms, without treaty or capitulation, and
the

Moslems are impatient to seize the fruits of their victory. "(2) The commander

of the faithful rejected with firmness the idea of pillage, and directed his
lieute­

nant to reserve the wealth and revenue of Alexandria for the public service
and

the propagation of the faith: the inhabitants were numbered; a tribute was im­

posed; the zeal and resentment of the Jacobites were curbed, and the
Melchites,

who submitted to the Arabian yoke, were indulged in the obscure but tranquil
ex­

ercise of their worship. The intelligence of this disgraceful and calamitous
event

afflicted the declining health of the emperor; and Heraclius died of a dropsy

about seven weeks after the loss of Alexandria. (3) Under the minority of his

grandson, the clamours of a people, deprived of their daily sustenance, com­

pelled the Byzantine court to undertake the recovery of the capital of Egypt.

In the space of four years, the harbour and fortifications of Alexandria were

twice occupied by a fleet and army of Romans. They were twice expelled by

the valour of Amrou, who was recalled by the domestic peril from the distant

wars of Tripoli and Nubia. But the facility of the attempt, the repetition of
the

insult, and the obstinacy of the resistance, provoked him to swear, that if a
third

time he drove the infidels into the sea, he would render Alexandria as
accessible

on all sides as the house of a prostitute. Faithful to his promise, he
dismantled

several parts of the walls and towers, but the people were spared in the chas­

tisement of the city, and the mosch of Mercy was erected on the spot where the

victorious general had stopped the fury of his troops.

I should deceive the expectation of the reader, if I passed in silence the
fate of

the Alexandrian library, as it is described by the learned Abulpharagius. The

spirit of Amrou was more curious and liberal than that of his brethren, and in

his leisure hours, the Arabian chief was pleased with the conversation of
John,

the last disciple of Ammonius, and who derived the surname of P/iilofionus
from

(1) Both Eutychius (Anna), torn. ii. p. 319.) and Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p.
23.) concur in fixine; the

taking of A lexandria to Friday uf the new moon of Muharram of the twentieth
year of the Hejrira (Decem­

ber 22. A. D. 640.) In reckoning backwards fourteen months spent belore
Alexandria, seven months before

Babylon, &c. Amrou rni^ht have invaded Krjypt about the end of the year 633;
hut we are assured that becn-

teied the country the twelfth ot Bavni. sixth of June (Murtadi Merveilles de
i'Efrypte, p. 164. Sev.-rus, apud

Renaudut. p. 152.) Tiie Saracen, and afterwards Louis IX. of France, halted at
Pelusiunj, or Damietta, during

the season of the inundation of the Nile.

(2) Kutych. Annal. torn. ii. p. 316. 319.

(3) Notwithstanding some inconsistencies of Theophanes and Cedrenus, the
accuracy of Pie^t (Critica, tout,

ii. p. 824.) (.as estraeted from Nicephorus and the Chronicon Orientale the
true date of the death uf Heraclius,

February 11. A. D. 641, fifty daysafter the lost of Alexandria. A foartn of
that time was sufficient to conrey

the intelligence.

