OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

more especially those of Thrace and Asia, were unwilling to depose their
patri­

arch for the use or even the abuse of this lawful jurisdiction. They embraced
the

knees of Dioscorus, as he stood with a threatening aspect on the footstool of
his

throne, and conjured him to forgive the offences, and to respect the dignity,
of his

brother. " Do you mean to raise a sedition ?" exclaimed the relentless tyrant,

" Where are the officers ?" At these words, a furious multitude of monks and

soldiers, with staves and swords, and chains, burst into the church: the
trembling

bishops hid themselves behind the altar, or under the benches, and as they
were

not inspired with the zeal of martyrdom, they successively subscribed a blank
pa-

er, which was afterward filled with the condemnation of the Byzantine pontiff,

lavian was instantly delivered to the wild beasts of this spiritual
amphitheatre:

the monks were stimulated by the voice and example of Barsumas to avenge the
in­

juries of Christ: it is said that the patriarch of Alexandria reviled, and
buffeted, and

kicked, and trampled his brother of Constantinople :(1) it is certain, that
the vic­

tim, before he could reach the place of his exile, expired, on the third day,
of

the wounds and bruises which he had received at Ephesus. This second synod

has been justly branded as a gang of robbers and assassins; yet the accusers
of Di­

oscorus would magnify his violence, to alleviate the cowardice and inconstancy
of

their own behaviour.

The faith of Egypt had prevailed: but the vanquished party was supported by

the same pope who encountered without fear the hostile rage of Attila and Gen-

seric. The theology of Leo, his famous tome or epistle on the mystery of the
incar­

nation, had been disregarded by the synod of Ephesus; his authority, and that
of

the Latin church, was insulted in his legates, who escaped from slavery and
death

to relate the melancholy tale of the tyranny of Dioscorus and the martyrdom of

Flavian. His provincial synod annulled the irregular proceedings of Ephesus;
but

as this step was itself irregular, he solicited the convocation of a general
council in

the free and orthodox provinces of Italy. From his independent throne, the Ro­

man bishop spoke and acted without danger, as the head of the Christians, and

his dictates were obsequiously transcribed by Placidia and her son
Valentinian;

who addressed their eastern colleague to restore the peace and unity of the
church.

But the pageant of oriental royalty was moved with equal dexterity by the hand

of the eunuch; and Theodosius could pronounce, without hesitation, that the

church was already peaceful and triumphant, and that the recent flame had been

extinguished by the just punishment of the Nestorians. Perhaps the Greeks

would be still involved in the heresy of the Monophysites, if the emperor's
horse

had not fortunately stumbled; Theodosius expired, his orthodox sister,
Pulcheria,

with a nominal husband, succeeded to the throne; Chrysaphius was burnt, Dios­

corus was disgraced, the exiles were recalled, and the tome of Leo was
subscribed

by the oriental bishops. Yet the pope was disappointed in his favourite
project of a

Latin council: he disdained to preside in the Greek synod, which was speedily
assem­

bled at Nice in Bithynia; his legates required, in a peremptory tone, the
presence of

the emperor: and the wary fathers were transported to Chalcedon under the im­

mediate eye of Marcian and the senate of Constantinople. A quarter of a mile

from the Thracian Bosphorus, the church of St. Euphemia was built on the sum­

mit of a gentle though lofty ascent: the triple structure was celebrated as a
pro­

digy of art, and the boundless prospect of the land and sea might have raised
the

mind of a. sectary to the contemplation of the God of the universe. Six
hundred

and thirty bishops were ranged in order in the nave of the church; but the
patri­

archs of the east were preceded by the legates, of whom the third was a simple

priest: and the place of honour was reserved for twenty laymen of consular or
se-

natorian rank. The gospel was ostentatiously displayed in the centre, but the
rule

of faith was defined by the papal and imperial ministers; who moderated the

thirteen sessions of the council of Chalcedon. (2) Their partial interposition
si-

(1) E*.s>-s Si (Eusebius, biihop of Dorylseum) to, OXw3*xvov *»* J;i*jein's
sevatpsSHv*' irps^Aiatrxopov oiSwpsvcv

ti Kgi xaxni^ufvcv: and this testimony of Evagrius (lib. ii. c. 2.) is
amplified by the historian Zonaras, (torn.

11. lib. xiti. p. 44.) who affirms that Dioscorus kicked like a wild ass. But
the language of Liberotus (Brer. c.

12. in Ceneil. torn. Ti. p. 438,) is more cautious; and the Acts of Chalcedon,
which lavishthe names of homi­

cide, Cain, &c. do not justify so pointed a charge. The monk Banuraas is more
particularly accused—

tow naxwpiov 4>iUuiavov mwto; ,o-ti)«s Koti iMys, fl-pa^of. (Concil. torn. iv.
p. 1423.)

(') The acts of the Council of Chalcedon, (Concil. torn. iv. p. 761—2071.)
comprehend those of Ephesus,(p.

890—1189.) which air>in comprise the synod of Constantinople under Flarian;
(p. 930—1072.) and it requires

some attention to disengage this double involution. The whole business of
Eutyches, Flavian and Dioscorus

is related by Evagrius (lib. i. c 9. 12. and lib. ii. c 1—4.) and Liberatus.
(Brev. c. 11—14. Once more, and al­

most for the last time, I appeal to the diligence of Tilleraont,(Mem. Eccles.
torn. xv. p. 479—719.) The an­

nals of Baroniw and Pagi will accompany me much farther on my long and
laborious journey.

