OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 35

vived and propagated in the modem schools of jurisprudence. After Rome her­

self had been stripped of the imperial purple, the princes of Constantinople
as­

sumed the sole and sacred sceptre of the monarchy; demanded, as their rightful

inheritance, the provinces which had been subdued by the consuls, or possessed

by the Caisars, and feebly aspired to deliver their faithful subjects of the
west

from the usuipation of heretics and barbarians. The execution of this splendid

design was in some degree reserved for Justinian. During the five first years
of

his reign, he reluctantly waged a costly and unprofitable war against the
Persians;

till his pride submitted to his ambition, and he purchased, at the price of
440,000/.

sterling, the benefit of a precarious truce, which, in the language of both
nations,

was dignified with the appellation of the endless peace. The safety of the
east

enabled the emperor to employ his forces against the Vandals; and the internal

state of Africa afforded an honourable motive, and promised a powerful
support,

to the Roman arms.(l)

According to the testament of the founder, the African kingdom had lineally

descended to Hilderic, the eldest of the Vandal princes. A mUd disposition in­

clined the son of a tyrant, the grandson of a conqueror, to prefer the
counsels of

clemency and peace; and his accession was marked by the salutary edict, which

restored two hundred bishops to their churches, and allowed free profession of

the Athanasian creed.(2) But the catholics accepted, with cold and transient

gratitude, a favour so inadequate to their pretensions, and the virtues of
Hilderic

offended the prejudices of his countrymen. The Arian clergy presumed to in­

sinuate that he had renounced the faith, and the soldiers more loudly
complained

that he had degenerated from the courage of his ancestors. His ambassadors

were suspected of a secret and disgraceful negotiation in tie Byzantine court;
and

his general, the Achilles,(3) as he was named, of the Va»dals, lost a battle
against

the naked and disorderly Moors. The public disconte«t was exasperated by Ge-

limer, whose age, descent, and military fame, gave lvm an apparent title to
the

succession; he assumed, with the consent of the nation, the reigns of govern­

ment; and his unfortunate sovereign sunk without a struggle from the throne to
a

dungeon, where he was striptly guarded, with a faithful counsellor, and his
unpo­

pular nephew, the Achilles of'the Vandals. But the indulgence which Hilderic

had shown to his catholic subjects had powerfully recommended him to the fa­

vour of Justinian, who, for the benefit of bis own sect, could acknowledge the
use

and justice of religious toleration: their alliance, while the nephew of
Justin re­

mained in a private station, was cemented by the mutual exchange of gifts and

letters; and the emperor Justinian asserted the cause of loyalty and
friendship.

In two successive embassies, he admonished the usurper to repent of his
treason,

or to abstain, at least, from anv further violence, which might provoke the
dis­

pleasure of God and of the Romans; to reverence the laws of kindred and suc­

cession, and to suffer an infirm old man peaceably to end his days, either on
the

throne of Carthage, or in the palace of Constantinople. The passions or even
the

prudence of Gelimer compelled him to reject these requests, which were urged

in the haughty tone of menace and command; and he justified his ambition in a

language rarely spoken in a Bvzantine court, by alleging the right of a free
people

to remove or punish their chief magistrate, who had failed in the execution of
the

kingly office. After this fruitless expostulation, the captive monarch was
most

rigorously treated; his nephew was deprived of his eyes, and the cruel Vandal,

confident in his strength and distance, derided the vain threats and slow
prepara­

tions of the emperor of the eas*. Justinian resolved to deliver or revenge his

friend; Gelimer to maintain his usurpation; and the war was preceded,
according

to the practice of civilized tvitions, by the most solemn protestations that
each

party was sincerely desirous of peace.

The report of an African war was grateful only to the vain and idle populace

of Constantinople, whose poverty exempted them from tribute, and whose co-

(1) The complete series of (lie Vandal war is related by Procopius, in
regiilarand elegant narrative, (lib.;.

e.9—25. lib. ii. c. 1—13.) and happy would be my lot, could I always tread in
the footsteps of stich a guide.

From the entire and diligent perusal of the Greek text, I have a right to
pronounce that the Latin and

French versions of Grotitis and Cousin, may not be implicitly trusted: yet the
President Cousin has beeo often

praised, and Hugo Grotius was the first scholar of a learned acre.

(2) See Kuinart. Hist. Persecur. Vandal, c. xii. p. 589, His best evidence is
drawn from the life of Sf. Kul-

trcntius, composed by one of his disciples, transcribed in a treat measure in
the annals of Baronius, and

printed in several great collections. (Catalog. Bibliot. Bunavitena:, torn. i.
vol. ii. p. 1258.)

(3) For what quality of the mind or body? For speed, or be:iuly, or valour.'
In what language did the Van-

Oals read Homer?—Did he speak German? The Latins had four versions: (Fabric,
torn. i. lib. ii. c. 3. p. 297.)

yet in spite of the praises of Seneca, (Consol. c. 26.) they appear to have
been more successful in imitating

than in translating the Greek poets. But the name of Achilles might be famous
and popular, even among

the illiterate barbarians.

