THE DECLINE AND FALL

not insensible, (replied the king of the Vandals) how kind and rational is
your ad­

vice. But I cannot persuade myself, to become the slave of an unjust enemy,
who

has deserved my implacable hatred. Him I had never injured either by word or

deed; yet he has sent against me, I know not from whence, a certain
Belisarius,

who has cast me headlong from the throne into this abyss of misery. Justinian
is

a man; he is a prince; does he not dread for himself a similar reverse of
fortune?

I can write no more; my grief oppresses me. Send me, I beseech you, my dear

Pharas, send me a lyre, (1) a sponge, and a loaf of bread." From the Vandal
mes­

senger, Pharas was informed of the motives of this singular request. It was
long

since the king of Africa had tasted bread; a defluxion had fallen on his eyes,
the

effect of fatigue or incessant weeping; and he wished to solace the melancholy

hours, by singing to the lyre the sad story of his own misfortunes. The
humanity

of Pharas was moved; he sent the three extraordinary gifts; but even his
humani­

ty prompted him to redouble the vigilance of his guard that he might sooner
com­

pel his prisoner to embrace a resolution advantageous to the Romans, but
salutary

to himself. The obstinacy of Gelimer at length yielded to reason and
necessity;

the solemn assurances of safety and honourable treatment were ratified in the
em­

peror's name, by the ambassador of Belisarius; and the king of the Vandals de­

scended from the mountain. The first public interview was in one of the
suburbs

of Carthage, and when the royal captive accosted his conqueror, he burst into
a fit

of laughter. The crowd might naturally believe, that extreme grief had
deprived

Gelimer of his senses; but in this mournful state, unseasonable mirth
insinuated to

more intelligent observers, that the vain and transitory scenes of human
greatness

are unworthy of a serious thought.(2)

Their contempt was soon justified by a new example of a vulgar truth; that

flattery adheres to power, and envy to superior merit. The chiefs of the Roman

army presumed to think themselves the rivals of a hero. Their private
despatches

maliciously affirmed, that the conqueror of Africa, strong in his-reputation
and

the public love, conspired to seat himself on the throne of the Vandals.
Justinian

listened with too patient an ear; and his silence was the result of jealousy
rather

than of confidence. An honourable alternative, of remaining in the province or

of returning to the capital, was indeed submitted to the discretion of
Belisarius; but

he wisely concluded, from intercepted letters, and the knowledge of his
sovereign's

temper, that he must either resign his head, erect his standard, or confound
his

enemies by his presence and submission. Innocence and courage decided his

choice: his guards, captives, and treasures, were diligently embarked; and so

prosperous was the navigation, that his arrival at Constantinople preceded any

certain account of his departure from the port of Carthage. Such unsuspecting

loyalty removed the apprehensions of Justinian: envy was silenced and inflamed

by the public gratitude; and a third Africanus obtained the honours of a
triumph,

a ceremony which the city of Constantinople had never seen, and which ancient

Rome, since the reign of Tiberius, had reserved for the ausfiiciom arms of the

Cxsars.(3) From the palace of Belisarius, the procession was conducted through

the principal streets of the hippodrome; and this memorable day seemed to

avenge the injuries of Genseric, and to expiate the shame of the Romans. The

wealth of nations was displayed, the trophies of martial or effeminate luxury;
rich

armour, golden thrones, and the chariots of state which had been used by the
Van­

dal queen; the massy furniture of the royal banquet, the splendour of precious

stones, the elegant forms of statues and vases, the more substantial treasure
of

gold, and the holy vessels of the Jewish temple, which, after their long
peregri­

nation, were respectfully deposited in the Christian church of Jerusalem. A
long

train of the noblest Vandals reluctantly exposed their lofty stature and manly

Countenance. Gelimer slowly advanced: he was Clad in a purple robe, and still

maintained the majesty of a king. Not a tear escaped from his eyes, not a sigh

was heard; but his pride or piety derived some secret consolation from the
words

(1) By Procopins it is styled a lyre; perhaps harp would have been mote
national. The instruments of mu­

sic are those distinguished by Venantius Fortunatus:—

Romauusque lyra tibi plaudit, Barbarus harpa*

(2) Herodotus elegantly describes the strange effects of grief in another
roya! captive, Psammetichui of

Egypt, who wept at the lesser, and was silent at the greatest of his
calamities, (lib. iii. c. 14.) In the interview,

of Paulus jEmilius and Perses, Belisarius might study his part: but it is
probable that he never read either Livy

or Plutarch; and it is certain that his generosity did not need a tutor.

(3) After the title of imperatar had lost the old military sense, and the
Roman auspices were abolished by

Christianity (see La Bleterie, Mem. de 1'Academic, torn, xii, p. 302—332,) a
triumph might be given with less

inconsistency to a .private general. m

