THE DECLINE AND FALL

than arms or numbers. Be patient till they have loaded themselves with the

incumbrance of wealth. This possession of wealth will divide their counsels,
and

assure your victory." This subtle policy is perhaps a refinement of the
Arabian

writers; and the situation of Charles will suggest a more narrow and selfish
mo­

tive of procrastination; the secret desire of humbling the pride, and wasting
the

provinces, of the rebel duke of Aquitain. It is yet more probable, that the
delays

of Charles were inevitable and reluctant.. A standing army was unknown under

the first and second race: more than half the kingdom was now in the hands of

the Saracens: according to their respective situations, the Franks of Neustria
and

Austrasia were too conscious or too careless of the impending danger; and the
vo­

luntary aids of the Gepidsc and Germans were separated by a long interval from

the standard of the Christian general. No sooner had he collected his forces,
than

he sought and found the enemy in the centre of France, between Tours and Poi­

tiers. His well conducted march was covered by a range of hills, and Abderame

appears to have been surprised by his unexpected presence. The nations of
Asia,

Africa, and Europe, advanced with equal ardour, to an encounter which would

change the history of the world. In the six first days of desultory combat,
the

horsemen and archers of the east maintained their advantage: but in the closer

onset of the seventh day the orientals were oppressed by the strength and
stature

of the Germans, who, with stout hearts and iron hands,(l) asserted the civil
and

religious freedom of their posterity. The epithet of Martel, the Hammer, which

has been added to the name of Charles, is expressive of his weighty and
irresisti­

ble strokes: the valour of Eudes was excited by resentment and emulation; and

their companions, in the eye of history, are the true peers and paladins of
French

chivalry. After a bloody field, in which Abderame was slain, the Saracens, in
the

close of the evening, retired to their camp. In the disorder and despair of
the night,

the various tribes of Yemen and Damascus, of Africa and Spain, were provoked
to

turn their arms against each other: the remains of their host were suddenly
dis­

solved, and each emir consulted his safety by a hasty and separate retreat. At
the

dawn of day, the stillness of a hostile camp was suspected by the victorious
Chris­

tians: on the report of their spies, they ventured to explore the riches of
the va­

cant tents; but, if we except some celebrated relics, a small portion of the
spoil

was restored to the innocent and lawful owners. The joyful tidings were soon
dif­

fused over the catholic world, and the monks of Italy could affirm and believe
that

three hundred and fifty, or three hundred and seventy-five thousand of the Ma­

hometans had been crushed by the hammer of Charles:(2) while no more than

fifteen hundred Christians were slain in the field of Tours. But this
incredible tale

is sufficiently disproved by the caution of the French general, who
apprehended

the snares and accidents of a pursuit, and dismissed his German allies to
their na­

tive forests. The inactivity of a conqueror betrays the loss of strength and
blood,

and the most cruel execution is inflicted, not in the ranks of battle, but on
the backs

of a flying enemy. Yet the victory of the Franks was complete and final; Aqui­

tain was recovered by the arms of Eudes; the Arabs never resumed the conquest

of Gaul, and they were soon driven beyond the Pyrenees by Charles Martel and
his

valiant race. (3) It might have been expected that the saviour of Christendom

would have been canonized, or at least applauded, by the gratitude of the
clergy,

who are indebted to his sword for their present existence. But in the public
dis­

tress the mayor of the palace had been compelled to apply the riches, or at
least

the revenues, of the bishops and abbots, to the relief of the state and the
reward

of the soldiers. His merits were forgotten, his sacrilege alone was
remembered,

and, in an epistle to a Carlovingian prince, a Gallic synod presumes to
declare

that his ancestor was damned; that on the opening of his tomb, the spectators
were

affrighted by a smell of fire and the aspect of a horrid dragon; and that a
saint of

(!) Gens Austria membrorum pre-cminentia valida, el gens Germans corde et
corpore pracstantissiina, quasi

in ictu aeuti maim ferrea et pectore arduo Arabes extinxerunt. (Roderic.
Toleian. c. 14.)

(2) These numbers are stated by Paul Warnefrid, the deacon of Aquilcia (de
Gestis Langobard. lib. vi. p.

921. edit. Grot.) and Anastasius, the librarian of the Unman church, (in Vit.
Gregorii II.) who tells o. miracu­

lous story of three consecrated sponges, which rendered invulnerable the
French soldiers among whom they

had been shared. It should seem, that in his letters to the pope, Eudes
usurped the honour of the victory, for

which he was chastised by the French annalists, who, with equal falsehood,
accuses liim of inviting the Sara­

cens.

(3) Narbovtne, and the rest of Septimania, was recovered by Pepin, the son of
Charles Martel, A. D. 755.

(nsgl,Critics, torn. iii. p. 300.) Thirty-seven years afterward it was
pillaged by a sudden inroad of the Arabs,

wlio employed the captives in the construction of the mascri of Cordova. (De
Guigncs,Hist. des Hum, torn, i-

p. 354.)

