i48 THE DECLINE AND FALL

frugal maxims of a republican government. The heroic courage of Ali,(f)tnt?

consummate prudence of Moawiyah,(2) excited the emulation of their subjects;

and the talents which had been exercised in the school of civil discord, were
more

usefully applied to propagate the faith and dominion of the prophet. In the

sloth and vanity of the palace of Damascus, the succeeding princes of the
house

of Ommiyah were alike destitute of the qualifications of statesmen and of
saints. (3)

Yet the spoils of unknown nations were continually laid at the foot of their
throne,

and the uniform ascent of the Arabian greatness must be ascribed to the spirit
of

the nation rather than the abilities of their chiefs. A large deduction must
be al­

lowed for the weakness of their enemies. The birth of Mahomet was fortunately

placed in the most degenerate and disorderly period of the Persians, the
Romans,

and the barbarians of Europe: the empires of Trajan, or even of Constantine or

Charlemagne, would have repelled the assault of the naked Saracens, and the

torrent of fanaticism might have been obscurely lost in the sands of Arabia.

In the victorious days of the Roman republic, it had been the aim of the
senate

to confine their consuls and legions to a single war, and completely to
suppress a

first enemy before they provoked the hostilities of a second. These timid max­

ims of policy were disdained by the magnanimity or enthusiasm of the Arabian

caliphs. With the same vigour and success they invaded the successors of Au­

gustus, and those of Artaxerxes; and the rival monarchies at the same instant
be­

came the prey of an enemy whom they had been so long accustomed to despise.

In the ten years of the administration of Omar, the Saracens reduced to his
obe­

dience thirty-six thousand cities or castles, destroyed four thousand churches
or

temples of the unbelievers, and edified fourteen hundred moschs for the
exercise

of the religion of Mahomet. One hundred years after his flight from Mecca, the

arms and the reign of his successors extended from India to the Atlantic
ocean, over

the various and distant provinces which may be comprised under the names of,
I.

Persia;II. Syria; III. Egypt; IV. Africa; andV. Spain. Underthis general
division,

I shall proceed to unfold these memorable transactions; despatching with
brevity

the remote and less interesting conquests of the east, and reserving a fuller
narra­

tive for those domestic countries, which' had been included within the pale of
the

Roman empire. Yet I must excuse my own defects by a just complaint of the

blindness and insufficiency of my guides. The Greeks, so loquacious in contro­

versy, have not been anxious to celebrate the triumphs of their enemies. (4)
Af­

ter a century of ignorance, the first annals of the Mussulmans were collected
in a

great measure from the voice of tradition. (5) Among the numerous productions

of Arabic and Persian literature,(6) our interpreters have selected the
imperfect

sketches of a more recent age. (7) The art and genius of history have ever
been

(l) Hi»reign in Eutychius, p.343. Elmacin, p. 5!. Abulpharagius, p. 417.
Abulfeda,p. 83. D'Herbelotr

P (2) His reign in Eutychius, p. 344. Klniacin, p. 54. Abulpharagius, p. 123.
Abulfeda, p. 101. D'Herbelot,

P.J86.

(3) Tbeir reigns in Eutychius.torn. ii. p. 360—395. Elmacin. p. 59—108.
Abulpharagius, ciyuan. 9. p. 124—

139. Abulfeda, p. Ill—141. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 691. and the
particular articles of the

Ommiades.

(4) For the seventh and eighth centuries, we have scarcely any original
evidence of the Byzantine historians,

except the chronicles of Thtophanes (Th'ophanis Confcstoris Chronographia, Gr.
et Lat. cum notis Jacobi

Goar. Paris, 1655, in folio;) and the abridgment of Nicephnrus (Nicephori
Patriarchal C. P. Breviarum H»to-

ricum, Gr. et Lat. Pans, 1648, in folio.) who both lived in the beginning of
the ninth century (see Hanckius de

Scriptor. Byzant. _y. 200—246.) Their coteniporary Photius does not seem to be
mere opulent. After prats*

ing the style of Nicephorus, he adds, K»i o>.w,- ireAAov.; tri rrpti aisrou
eMrexpuaro.Mlvos T*fit tus i-"Toptst;,Ti a-uvvp*$i«,

and only complains of his extreme brevity (Phot. Bibliot. cod. 66. p. 100.)
Some additions may be gleaned from

the more recent histories of Cedrenus and Zonaras of the twelfth century.

(5) Tabari,or Al Tabari, a native of Tahorestan, a famous imam of Bagdad, and
the Livy of the Arabians,

finished his general history in the year of the Hegira, 302 (A. D. 014.) At
the request^ of his friends, he reduced

a work of thirty thousand sheets to a more reasonable size. But his Arabic
Original is known only by the Per­

sian and Turkish versions. The Saracenic history of Ebn Amid, or Elmacin, is
-aid to be an abridgment of

the great Tabtui (Ockley's Hist, of the Saracens, vol. 2. preface, p. 39. and,
list of authors, d'Herbelot, p. 866-.

ST0.1014.)

(6) Besides the list of authors framed by Prideaus (Life of Mahomet, p.
179—189.,) Ockley (at the end of his

second volume,) and the Petit de la Croix (Hist, de Gengiscan, p. 525—550.,)
we And in the Bibliotheque Ori­

entate Tarik/i, a catalogue of two or three hundred histories or chronicles of
the east, of which not more than

three or four are older than Tabari. A lively sketch of oriental literature is
given by Reiske (in his Prorlidag-

mats ad Hagji Chalifre librum memorialem ad ealcem Abulfeda9 Tabulee, Svrise,
Lipsite, 1766.0 but his project

and the French version of Petit de la Croix (Hist, de Timur Bee, torn, ii
preface, p. 45.) have fallen to the

ground.

(7) The particular historians and geographers will be occasionally introduced.
The four following title- re­

present the annals, which hav guided me in this general narrative.—1. Annates
Eutychiij Patriarchal Ah.van.

dnn'i, ab Edtvardo Pocock'io. Oxon. 1656, two voU. in quarto; a pompous
edition of an indifferent author, trans­

lated by Pocock, to gratify the presbyterian prejudice of his friend Selden.
2. fliitoria Sararenica Gevrgii Eh

mnciul, opera et ttudio Thomm Erpenii, in quarto Lugd. Batavorum, 1625. He is
said to have hastily translated

a corrupt MS. and his version is aften deficient in style and sense. 3.
Historia ctmfxndiola DynaJtiarttm a

