OS THE ROHAN EMPIRE". 361

discharge by an executioner. The refusal of Alexius to march against a fourth

rebel, the husband of his sister, destroyed the merit or memory of his past
services:

the favourites of Botaniates provoked the ambition which they apprehended and

accused; and the retreat of tne two brothers might be justified by the defence
of

their life or liberty. The women of the family were deposited in a sanctuary,

respected by tyrants: the men, mounted on horseback, sallied from the city,
and

erected the standard of civil war. The soldiers, who had been gradually assem­

bled in the capital and tne neighbourhood, were devoted to the cause of a
victori­

ous and injured leaden the ties of common interest and domestic alliance
secured

the attachment of the house of Ducas: and the generous dispute of the Comneni
was

terminated by the decisive resolution of Isaac, who was the first to invest
his

younger brother with the name and ensigns of royalty. They returned to Con­

stantinople, to threaten rather than besiege that impregnable fortress; but
the

fidelity of the guards was corrupted: a gate was surprised; and the fleet was
occu­

pied by the active courage of George Pelzologus, who fought against his
father,

without foreseeing that he laboured for his posterity. Alexius ascended the

throne; and his aged competitor disappeared in a monastery. An army of various

nations was gratified with the pillage of the city; but the public disorders
were

expiated by the tears and fasts of the Comneni, who submitted to every penance

compatible with the possession of the empire.

The life of .the emperor Alexius had been delineated by a favourite daughter,

who was inspired by a tender regard for his person, and a laudable zeal to
perpe­

tuate his virtues. Conscious of the just suspicion of her readers, the
princess Anna

Comnena repeatedly protests, that, besides her personal knowledge, she had

searched the discourse and writings of the most respectable veterans; that
after an

interval of thirty years, forgotten by, and forgetful of, the world, her
mournful soli­

tude was inaccessible to hope and fear; and that truth, the naked perfect
truth, was

more dear and sacred than the memory of her parent. Yet, instead of the
simpli­

city of style and narrative which wins our belief, an elaborate affectation of
rhetoric

and science betrays in every page the vanity of a female author. The genuine

character of Alexius is lost in a vague constellation of virtues: and the
perpetual

strain of panegyric and apology awakens our jealousy, to question the veracity

of the historian and the merit of the hero. We cannot however refuse her judi­

cious and important remark, that the disorders of the times were the
misfortune

and the glory of Alexius; and that every calamity which can afflict a
declining em­

pire was accumulated on his reign by the justice of Heaven and the vices of
his

predecessors. In the east, the victorious Turks had spread, from Persia to
Hel­

lespont, the reign of the Koran and the crescent: the west was invaded by the
ad­

venturous valour of the Normans; and in the moments of peace, the Danube

Eoured forth new swarms, who had gained, in the science of war, what they had

*t in the ferociousness of manners. The sea was not less hostile than the land;  
and while the frontiers were assaulted by an open enemy, the palace was
distract­

ed with secret treason and conspiracy. On a sudden the banner of the cross was

displayed by the Latins: Europe has precipitated on Asia; and Constantinople
had

almost been swept away by this impetuous deluge. In the tempest, Alexius

steered the imperial vessel with dexterity and courage. At the head of his ar­

mies, he was bold in action, skilful in stratagem, patient of fatigue, ready
to im­

prove his advantages, and rising from his defeats with inexhaustible vigour.
The

discipline of the camp was revived, and a new generation of men and soldiers
was

created by the example and the precepts of their leader. In his intercourse
with

the Latins, Alexius was patient and artful: his discerning eye pervaded the
new sys­

tem of an unknown world; and I shall hereafter describe the superior policy
with

which he balanced the interests and passions of the champions of the first
crusade.

In along reign of thirty-seven years, he subdued and pardoned the envy of his
equals:

the laws of public and private order were restored: the arts of wealth and
science

were cultivated: the limits of the empire were enlarged in Europe and Asia;
and

the Comnenian sceptre was transmitted to his children of the third and fourth

generation. Yet the difficulties of the times betrayed some defects in his
charac­

ter; and have exposed his memory to some just or ungenerous reproach. The

reader may possibly smile at the lavish praise which his daughter so often
bestows

on a flying hero: the weakness or prudence of his situation might be mistaken
for a

want of personal courage; and his political arts are branded by the Latins
with the

names of deceit and dissimulation. The increase of the male and female
branches

of his family adorned the throne and secured the succession: but their
princely

