OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

of Assyria were open for the first time to the Romans. By a just gradation of

magnificent scenes, they penetrated to the royal seat of Dastagerd, and though

much of the treasure had been removed, and much had been expended, the re­

maining wealth appears to have exceeded their hopes, and even to have satiated

their avarice. Whatever could not be easily transported, they consumed with
fire,

that Chosroes might feel the anguish of those wounds, which he had so often
in­

flicted on the provinces of the empire: and justice might allow the excuse, if
the

desolation had been confined to the works of regal luxury, if national hatred,
mi­

litary license, and religious zeal, had not wasted with equal rage the
habitations

and the temples of the guiltless subject. The recovery of three hundred Roman

standards, and the deliverance of the numerous captives of Edessa and Alexan­

dria, reflect a purer glory on the arms of Heraclius. From the palace of
Dasta­

gerd, he pursued his march within a few miles of Modian or Ctesiphon, till he

was stopped on the banks of the Arba, by the difficulty of the passage, the
rigour

of the season, and perhaps the fame of an impregnable capital. The return of
the

emperor is marked by the modern name of the city of Sherhzour; he fortunately

passed mount Zara, before the snow, which fell incessantly thirty-four days,
and

the citizens of Gandzaca, or Tauris, were compelled to entertain his soldiers
and

their horses with a hospitable reception. (1)

When the ambition of Chosroes was reduced to the defence of his hereditary

kingdom, the love of glory, or even the sense of shame, should have urged him
to

meet his rival in the field. In the battle of Nineveh, his courage might have

taught the Persians to vanquish, or he might have fallen with honour by the
lance

of a Roman emperor. The successor «f Cyrus chose rather, at a secure distance,

to expect the event, to assemble the relics of the defeat, and to retire by
mea­

sured steps before the march of Heraclius, till he beheld with a sigh the
once-loved

mansions of Dastagerd. Both his friends and enemies were persuaded, that it

was the intention of Chosroes to bury himself under the ruins of the city and
pa­

lace: and as both might have been equally adverse to his flight, the monarch
of

Asia, with Sira, and three concubines, escaped through a hole in the wall nine

days before the arrival of the Romans. The slow and stately procession in
which

he showed himself to the prostrate crowd, was changed to a rapid and secret
jour­

ney; and the first evening he lodged in the cottage of a peasant, whose humble
door

would scarcely give admittance to the great king. (2) His superstition was
sub­

dued by fear: on the third day, he entered with joy the fortifications of
Ctesiphon;

yet he still doubted of his safety till he had opposed the river Tigris to the
pursuit

of the. Romans. The discovery of his flight agitated with terror and tumult
the

Ealace, the city, and the camp, of Dastagerd: the satraps hesitated whether
they

ad most to fear from their sovereign or the enemy; and the females of the
haram

were astonished and pleased by the sight of mankind, till the jealous husband
of

three thousand wives again confined them to a more distant castle. At his com­

mand, the army of Dastagerd retreated to a new camp: the front was covered

by the Arba, and a line of two hundred elephants; the troops of the more
distant

provinces successively arrived, and the vilest domestics of the king and
satraps,

were enrolled for the last defence of the throne. It was still in the power of
Chos­

roes to obtain a reasonable peace; and he was repeatedly pressed by the
messen­

gers of Heraclius, to spare the blood of his subjects, and to relieve a humane
con­

queror from the painful duty of carrying fire and sword through the fairest
coun­

tries of Asia. But the pride of the Persian had not yet sunk to the level of
his

fortune; he derived a momentary confidence from the retreat of the emperor: he

wept with impotent rage over the ruins of his Assyrian palaces, and
disregarded

too long the rising murmurs of the nation, who complained that their lives and

fortunes were sacrificed to the obstinacy of an old man. That unhappy old man

was himself tortured with the sharpest pains both of mind and body; and, in
the

consciousness of his approaching end, he resolved to fix the tiara on the head
of

Merdaza, the most favoured of his sons. But the will of Chosroes was no longer

revered, and Siroes, who gloried in the rank and merit of his mother Sira, had

conspired with the malcontents to assert and anticipate the rights of
primogeni-

(1) In describing this last expedition of Heraclius, the facts, the places,
ami the dates of Theophaoes, (p.

Sfl5—271.) are so accurate and authentic that he must have followed the
original letters of the emperor, of

which the Paschal Chronicle has preserved (p. 398—402.) a very curious
specimen.

(2) The words of Theophanei are remarkable: tirqhSt Xa<rpot); us oixoi*
ytutpyov pyi$<ettnicu /«*van, ou %wpifwic

tv m toutou 6op», i}k iSmv itryp™ 'Hp*io.s<o; sSxpMrt, (p. 269.) Yotrqg
prhicei who discover a propensity to war

sjhoqld repeatedly iranrtrib? and translate sirch wfutary teim -

