OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 51

tance; her extreme lenity never consented to inflict any corporal or pecuniary

penalties on her Roman subjects; and she generously despised the clamours of
the

Goths, who at the end of forty years, still considered the people of Italy as
their

slaves or their enemies. Her salutary measures were directed by the wisdom,
and

celebrated by the eloquence of Cassiodorus; she solicited and deserved the
friend­

ship of the emperor; and the kingdoms of Europe respected, both in peace and

■war, the majesty of the Gothic throne. But the future happiness of the queen
and

of Italy depended on the education of her son, who was destined by his birth,

to support the different and almost incompatible characters of the chief of a
bar­

barian camp, and the first magistrate of a civilized nation. From the age of
ten

years,(l) Athalaric was diligently instructed in the arts and sciences, either
use­

ful or ornamental for a Roman prince; and three venerable Goths were chosen

to instil the principles of honour and virtue into the mind of their young
king. But

the pupil, who is insensible of the benefits, must abhor the restraints of
education;

and the solicitude of the queen, which affection rendered anxious and severe,
of­

fended the untractable nature of her son and his subjects. On a solemn
festival,

■when the Goths were assembled in the palace of Ravenna, the royal youth es­

caped from his mother's apartment, and with tears of pride and anger,
complained

of a blow which his stubborn disobedience had provoked her to inflict. The
bar­

barians resented the indignity which had been offered to their king; accused
the

regent of conspiring against his life and crown; and imperiously demanded,
that

the grandson of Theodoric should be rescued from the dastardly discipline of
wo­

men and pedants, and educated, like a valiant Goth, in the society of his
equals,

and the glorious ignorance of his ancestors. To this rude clamour,
importunate­

ly urged as the voice of the nation, Amalasontha was compelled to yield her
rea­

son, and the dearest wishes of her heart. The king of Italy was abandoned to

wine, to women, and to rustic sports; and the indiscreet contempt of the
ungrate­

ful youth, betrayed the mischievous designs of his favourites and her enemies.
En­

compassed with domestic foes, she entered into a secret negotiation with the
empe­

ror Justinian; obtained the assurance of a friendly reception, and had
actually depo­

sited at Dyrrachium in Epirus, a treasure of forty thousand pounds of gold.
Hap-

Sy would it have been for her fame and safety, if she had calmly retired from
bar-

arous faction, to the peace and splendour of Constantinople. But the mind of

Amalasontha was inflamed by ambition and revenge; and while her ships lay at

anchor in the port, she waited for the success of a crime, which her passions
ex­

cused or applauded as an act of justice. Three of the most dangerous malecon-

tents had been separately removed, under the pretence of trust and command, to

the frontiers of Italy; they were assassinated by her private emissaries; and
the

blood of those noble Goths rendered the queen-mother absolute in the court of

Ravenna, and justly odious to a free people. But if she had lamented the
disorder

of her son, she soon wept his irreparable loss; and the death of Athalaric,
who, at

the age of sixteen, was consumed by premature intemperance, left her destitute

of any firm support or legal authority. Instead of submitting to the laws of
her

country, which held as a fundamental maxim, that the succession could never

pass from the lance to the distaff, the daughter of Theodoric conceived the
im­

practicable design of sharing with one of her cousins, the regal title and of
re­

serving in her own hands the substance of supreme power. He received the pro­

posal with profound respect and affected gratitude; and the eloquent
Cassiodorus

announced to the senate and to the emperor, that Amalasontha and Theodatus had

ascended the throne of Italy. His birth (for his mother was the sister of
Theodoric)

might be considered as an imperfect title; and the choice of Amalasontha was
more

strongly directed by her contempt of his avarice and pusillanimity, which had
de­

prived him of the love of the Italians, and the esteem of the barbarians. But
The­

odatus was exasperated by the contempt which he deserved; her justice had
repres­

sed and reproached the oppression which he exercised against his Tuscan neigh­

bours; and the principal Goths, united by common guilt and resentment,
conspired

to instigate his slow and timid disposition. The letters of congratulation
were

scarcely despatched before the queen of Italy was imprisoned in a small island
of

the lake of Bolsena,(2) where, after a short confinement, she was strangled in
the

(1) At the death of Theodoric,his grandson Athalaric is described by Procopius
as a hoy about eight yean

old—ox™ yeyovea; mi. Cassiodorus, with authority and reason, adds two years to
his age—infamutum a'huc

vix decennero.

(2) The lake, from the neighbouring towns of Etruria, was stvled either
Vulsiniensis (now of Bolsena) or

Tarquuviensis. It is surrounded with white rocks, and stored with fish and
wild fowl. The youuger riiny

