24S THE DECLINE; AND FALL

A memorable reverse of fortune was displayed in Michael II. who, from a defect

in his speech, was surnamed the Stammerer. He was snatched from the fiery

furnace to the sovereignty of an empire; and as in the tumult a smith could

not readily be found, the fetters remained on his legs several hours after he
was

seated on the throne of the Caesars. The royal blood which had been the price

of his elevation, was unprofitably spent; in the purple he retained the
ignoble

vices of his origin; and Michael lost his provinces with as supine
indifference as if

they had been the inheritance of his fathers. His title was disputed by
Thomas,

the last of the military triumvirate, who transported into Europe fourscore
thou­

sand barbarians from the banks of the Tigris, and the shores of the Caspian.
He

formed the siege of Constantinople; but the capital was defended with
spiritual

and carnal weapons; a Bulgarian king assaulted the camp of the orientals, and

Thomas had the misfortune or the weakness to fall alive into the power of the

conqueror. The hands and feet of the rebel were amputated; he was placed on

an ass, and, amidst the insults of the people, was led through the streets,
which

he sprinkled with his blood. The depravation of' manners, as savage as they

were corrupt, is marked by the presence of the emperor himself. Deaf to the

lamentations of a fellow-soldier, he incessantly pressed the discovery of more
ac­

complices, till his curiosity was checked by the question of an honest or
guilty

minister:—'«Would you give credit to an enemy against the most faithful of
your

friends ?" After the death of his first wife, the emperor, at the request of
the se­

nate, drew from her monastery Euphrosyne, the daughter of Constantine VI.

Her august birth might justify a stipulation in the marriage-contract, that
her

children should equally share the empire with their elder brother. But the
nup­

tials of Michael and Euphrosyne were barren; and she was content with the
title

of mother of Theophilus, his son and successor.

The character of Theophilus is a rare example in which religious zeal has al­

lowed, and perhaps magnified, the virtues of a heretic, and a persecutor. His
valour

was often felt by the enemies, and his justice by the subjects, of the
monarchy; but

the valour of Theophilus was rash and fruitless, and his justice arbitrary and
cruel.

He displayed the banner of the cross against the Saracens; but his five
expedi­

tions were concluded by a signal overthrow; Amorium, the native city of his
an­

cestors, was levelled with the ground, and from his military toils, he derived
only

the surname of the Unfortunate. The wisdom of a sovereign is comprised in

the institution of laws and the choice of magistrates, and while he seems
without

action, his civil government revolved round his centre with the silence and
order

of the planetary system. But the justice of Theophilus was fashioned on the
mo­

del of the oriental despots, who, in personal and irregular acts of authority,
con­

sult the reason or passion of the moment without measuring the sentence by

the laws, or the penalty by offence. A poor woman threw herself at the empe­

ror's feet to complain of a powerful neighbour, the brother of the empress,
who

had raised his palace-wall to such an inconvenient height, that her humble

dwelling was excluded from light and air! On the proof of the fact, instead of

granting, like an ordinary judge, sufficient or ample damages to the
plaintiff, the

sovereign adjudged to her use and benefit the palace and the ground. Nor was

Theophilus content with this extravagant satisfaction; his zeal converted a
civil

trespass into a criminal act; and the unfortunate patrician was stripped and

scourged in the public place of Constantinople. For some venial offences, some

defect of equity or vigilance, the principal ministers, a prefect, a questor,
a cap­

tain of the guards, were banished or mutilated, or scalded with boiling pitch,
or

burnt alive in the hippodrome; and as these dreadful examples might be the ef­

fects of error or caprice, they must have alienated from his service the best
and

wisest of the citizens. But the pride of the monarch was flattered in the
exercise

of power, or, as he thought, of virtue; and the people, safe in their
obscurity, ap­

plauded the danger and debasement of their superiors. This extraordinary ri­

gour was justified, in some measure, by its salutary consequences; since,
after a

scrutiny of seventeen days, not a complaint or abuse could be found in the
court

or city; and it might be alleged that the Greeks could be ruled only with a
rod of

iron, and that the public interest is the motive and law of the supreme judge.
Yet

in the crime, or the suspicion of treason, that judge is of all others the
most

credulous and partial. Theophilus rrfight inflict a tardy vengeance on the
assas­

sins of Leo and the saviours of his father; but he enjoyed the fruits of their
crime;

and his jealous tyranny sacrificed a brother and a prince to the future safety
of his

life. A Persian or the race of the SaSsanides died in poverty and exile at
Cor.­

