40 THE DECLINE AND FALL

their departure from Constantinople, the men and horses, the arms and military

stores, were safely disembarked, and five soldiers were left as a guard on
board

each of the ships, which were disposed of in the form of a semicircle. The re­

mainder of the troops occupied a camp on the sea-shore, which they fortified
ac­

cording to ancient discipline, with a ditch and rampart; and the discovery of
a source_

of fresh water, while it allayed the thirst, excited the superstitious
confidence of

the Romans. The next morning, some of the neighbouring gardens were pillaged;

and Belisarius, after chastising the offenders, embraced the slight occasion,
but the

decisive moment, of inculcating the maxims of justice, moderation, and genuine

policy.—" When I first accepted the commission of subduing Africa, I depended

much less (said the general) on the numbers, or even the bravery, of my
troops,

than upon the friendly disposition of the natives, and their immortal hatred
to the

Vandals. You alone can deprive me of this hope: if you continue to extort by
ra­

pine what might be purchased for a little money, such acts of violence will
recon­

cile these implacable enemies, and unite them in a just and holy league
against the

invaders of their country." These exhortations were enforced by a rigid disci­

pline, of which the soldiers themselves soon felt and praised the salutary
effects.

The inhabitants, instead of deserting their houses, or hiding their corn,
supplied

the Romans with a fair and liberal market: the civil officers of the province
con­

tinued to exercise their functions in the name of Justinian; and the clergy,
from

motives of conscience and interest, assiduously laboured to promote the cause
of a

catholic emperor. The small town of Sullecte,(l) one day's journey from the

camp, had the honour of being foremost to open her gates, and to resume her
an­

cient allegiance: the larger cities of Leptis and Adrumetum imitated the
example

of loyalty as soon as Belisarius appeared; and he advanced without opposition
as

far as Grasse, a palace of the Vandal kings, at the distance of fifty miles
from Car­

thage. The weary Romans indulged themselves, in the refreshment of shady

groves, cool fountains, and delicious fruits; and the preference which
Procopius al­

lows to these gardens over any that he had seen, either in the east or west,
may

be ascribed either to the taste or the fatigue of the historian. In three
generations

prosperity and a warm climate had dissolved the hardy virtue of the Vandals,
who

insensibly became the most luxurious of mankind. In their villas and gardens,

which might deserve the Persian name of flaradise,{2) they enjoyed a cool and

elegant repose; and, after the daily use of the bath, the barbarians were
seated at

a table profusely spread with the delicacies of the land and sea. Their silken

robes, loosely flowing, after the fashion of the Medes, were embroidered with
gold:

love and hunting were the labours of their life; and their vacant hours, were

amused by pantomimes, chariot-races, and the music and dances of the theatre.

In a march of ten or twelve days, the vigilance of Belisarius was constantly

awake and active against his unseen enemies, by whom, in every place, and at
every

hour, he might suddenly be attacked. An officer of confidence and merit, John

the Armenian, led the vanguard of three hundred horse; six hundred Massagetai

covered at a certain distance the left flank; and the whole fleet, steering
along the

coast seldom lost sight of the army, which moved each day about twelve miles,

and lodged in the evening in strong camps or in friendly towns. The near ap­

proach of the Romans to Carthage filled the mind of Gelimer with anxiety and

terror. He prudently wished to protract the war till his brother, with his
vete­

ran troops, should return from the conquest of Sardinia, and he now lamented
the

rash policy of his ancestors, who, by destroying the fortifications of Africa,
had

left him only the dangerous resource of risking a battle in the neighbourhood
of

his capital. The Vandal conquerors, from their original number of fifty
thousand,

were multiplied, without including their women and children, to one hundred
and

sixty thousand fighting men: and such forces, animated with valour and union,

might have crushed, at their first landing, the feeble and exhausted bands of
the

Roman general. But the friends of the captive king were more inclined to ac­

cept the invitations, than to resist the progress, of Belisarius; and many a
proud

barbarian disguised his aversion to war under the more specious name of his
ha­

tred to the usurper. Yet the authority and promises of Gelimer collected a
for­

midable army, and his plans were concerted with some degree of military skill.

(1) SulWte is perhaps the Turrsi Hannibalis, an old building, now as large as
the tower of London. The

march of Belisarius to Leptis, Adrumetum, fee. is illustrated by the campaign
of Caesar, (Hirtius de Bella

Africano, with the Analyse of Goichardt,) and Shaw's Travels, (p. 105—113.) in
the same country.

(3) nxpaSfio-os jcxJAktto,' iowkhi-wv wv tj,«si? tTptv. The paradises, a name
and fashion adopted from Persia,

may be represented by the royal garden of Ispahan. (Voyage d'Oiearius, p.
774.) See, in the Greek ro­

mances, their most perfect model. (Longni, Pastoral,lib.it. p.99.101. Achilles
Tatius, lib. i: p. 82,25.

