THE DECLINE AND FALL

money. The subjects of Justinian who escaped these partial vexations, were op­

pressed by the irregular maintenance of the soldiers whom Alexander defrauded

and despised; and their hasty sallies, in quest of wealth or subsistence,
provoked "

the inhabitants of the country to await or implore their deliverance from the
vir­

tues of a barbarian. Totila(l) was chaste and temperate; and none were
deceived,

either friends or enemies, who depended on his faith or his clemency. To the

husbandmen of Italy the Gothic king issued a welcome proclamation, enjoining

them to pursue their important labours, and to rest assured, that, on the
payment

of the ordinary taxes, they should be defended by his valour and discipline
from

the injuries of war. The strong towns he successively attacked; and as soon as

they had yielded to his arms, he demolished the fortifications; to save the
people

from the calamities of a future siege, to deprive the Romans of the arts of
defence,

and to decide the tedious quarrel of the two nations, by an equal and
honourable

conflict in the field of battle. The Roman captives and deserters were tempted
to

enlist in the service of a liberal and courteous adversary; the slaves were
attracted

by the firm and faithful promise, that they should never be delivered to their
mas­

ters; and from the thousand warriors of Pavia, a new people, under the same
ap­

pellation of Goths, was insensibly formed in the camp of 1 otila. He sincerely
ac­

complished the articles of capitulation, without seeking or accepting any
sinister

advantage from ambiguous expressions or unforeseen events: the garrison of
Naples

had stipulated, that they should be transported by sea; the obstinacy of the
winds

prevented their voyage, but they were1 generously supplied with horses,
provisions,

and a safe conduct to the gates of Rome. The wives of the senators, who had

been surprised in the villas of Campania, were restored, without a ransom, to
their

husbands; the violation of female chastity was inexorably chastised with
death;

and, in the salutary regulation of the diet of the famished Neapolitans, the
con­

queror assumed the office of a humane and attentive physician. The virtues of

Totila are equally laudable, whether they proceeded from true policy,
religious

principle, or the instinct of humanity: he often harangued his troops; and it
was

his constant theme, that national vice and ruin are inseparably connected:
that vic­

tory is the fruit of moral as well as military virtue; and that the prince,
and even

the people are responsible for the crimes which they neglect to punish.

The return of Belisarius, to save the country which he had subdued, was
pressed

with equal vehemence by his friends and enemies; and the Gothic war was im­

posed as a trust or an exile on the veteran commander. A hero on the banks of

the Euphrates, a slave in the palace of Constantinople, he accepted, with
reluc­

tance, the painful task of supporting his own reputation, and retrieving the
faults

of his successors. The sea was open to the Romans: the ships and soldiers were

assembled at Salona, near the palace of Diocletian: he refreshed and reviewed
his

troops at Pola in Istria, coasted round the head of the Hadriatic, entered the
port

of Ravenna, and despatched orders rather than supplies to the subordinate
cities.

His first public oration was addressed to the Goths and Romans in the name of
the

emperor, who had suspended for awhile the conquest of Persia, and listened to
the

prayers of his Italian subjects. He gently touched on the causes and the
authors

of the recent disasters; striving to remove the fear of punishment for the
past, and

the hope of impunity for the future, and labouring, with more zeal than
success,

to unite all the members of his government in a firm league of affection and
obe­

dience. _ Justinian, his gracious master, was inclined to pardon and reward;
and it

was their interest, as well as duty, to reclaim their deluded brethren, who
had

been seduced by the arts of the usurper. Not a man was tempted to desert the

standard of the Gothic king. Belisarius soon discovered, that he was sent to
re­

main the idle and impotent spectator of the glory of a young barbarian; and
his

own epistle exhibits a genuine and lively picture of the distress of a noble
mind.—

"Most excellent prince; we are arrived in Italy, destitute of all the
necessary im­

plements of war, men, horses, arms, and money. In our late circuit through the

villages of Thrace and Illyrfcum, we have collected, with extreme difficulty,
about

four thousand recruits, naked, and unskilled in the use of weapons and the
exer­

cises of the camp. The soldiers already stationed in the province are
discontented,

fearful, and dismayed; at the sound of an enemy, they dismiss their horses,
and

cast their arms on the ground. No taxes can be raised, since Italy is in the
hands

of the barbarians; the failure of payment has deprived us of the right of
command,

. (1) Procopins (lib. iii. e. 3.8, &c.) does ample and willing justice to the
merit of Totila. The Raman histo­

rian!, from Sallustand Tacitui, were happy to forget the rices of their
countrymen in the contemplation of

