OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. .Ml

and silver, the various wardrobes and precious furniture, surpassed (says
Abulfe-

da) the estimate of fancy or numbers; and another historian defines the untold
and

almost infinite mass, by the fabulous computation of three thousands of
thousands

of thousands of pieces of gold.(l) Some minute though curious facts represent

the contrast of riches and ignorance. From the remote islands of the Indian

ocean, a large provision of camphire(2) had been imported, which is employed

with a mixture of wax to illuminate the palaces of the east. ' Strangers to
the

name and properties of that odoriferous gum, the Saracens, mistaking it for
salt,

mingled the camphire in their bread, and were astonished at the bitterness of
the

taste. One of the apartments of the palace was decorated with a carpet of
silk,

sixty cubits in length, and as many in breadth; a paradise, or garden, was
depic­

tured on the ground; the flowers, fruits, and shrubs, were imitated by the
figures

of the gold embroidery, and the colours of the precious stones; and the ample

square was encircled by a variegated and verdant border. The Arabian general

persuaded his soldiers to relinquish their claim, in the reasonable hope that
the

eyes of the caliph would be delighted with the splendid workmanship of nature

and industry. Regardless of the merit of art and the pomp of royalty, the
rigid

Omar divided the priie among his brethren of Medina: the picture was
destroyed;

but such was the intrinsic value of the materials, that the share of Ali alone
was

sold for twenty thousand drachms. A mule that carried away the tiara and cui­

rass, the belt and bracelets of Chosroes, was overtaken by the pursuers; the
gor­

geous trophy was presented to the commander of the faithful, and the gravest
of

the companions condescended, to smile when they beheld the white beard, hairy

arms, and uncouth figure, of the veteran, who was invested with the spoils of
the

great king. (3) The sack of Ctesiphon was followed by its desertion and
gradual

decay. The Saracens disliked the air and situation of the place, and Omar was

advised by his general, to remove the seat of government to the western side
of

the Euphrates. In every age the foundation and ruin of the Assyrian cities has

been easy and rapid; the country is destitute of stone and timber, and the
most so­

lid structures(4) are composed of bricks baked in the sun, and joined by a
cement

of the native bitumen. The name of Cufa(5) describes a habitation of reeds and

earth; but the importance of the new capital was supported by the numbers,

wealth and spirit, of a colony of veterans; and their licentiousness was
indulged

by the wisest caliphs, who were apprehensive of provoking the revolt of a hun­

dred thousand swords. "Ye men of Cufa," said Ali, who solicited their aid,

" you have been always conspicuous by your valour. You conquered the Persian

king, and scattered his forces, till you had taken possession of his
inheritance."

This mighty conquest was achieved by the battles of Jalula and Nehavend. Af­

ter the loss of the former, Yezdegerd new from Holwan, and concealed his shame

and despair in the mountains of Farsistan, from whence Cyrus had descended
with

his equal and valiant companions. The courage of the nation survived that of
the

monarch; among the hills to the south of Ecbatana or Hamadan, one hundred and

fifty thousand Persians made a third and final stand for their religion and
country;

and the decisive battle of Nehavend was styled by the Arabs the victory of
victo­

ries. If it be true that the flying general of the Persians was stopped and
over­

taken in a crowd of mules and camels laden with honey, the incident, however

slight or singular, will denote the luxurious impediments of an oriental
army.(6)

The geography of Persia is darkly delineated by the Greeks and Latins; but

the most illustrious of her cities appear to be more ancient than the invasion
of the

Arabs. By the reduction of Hamadan and Ispahan, of Caswin, Tauris, and Rei,

they gradually approached the shores of the Caspian sea; and the orators of
Mec-

(1) Mentevix potest numerove comprehend! quanta spolla .... nostris cessarinr.
Abulfeda, p. 69. Yet

I still suspect, that the extravagant numbers uf Elmacin may be the error, not
of the text, but of the version.

The best translators from the Greek, for instance, I find to be very poor
arithmeticians.

(2) The camphire trees grow in China and Japan; but many hundred weight of
those meaner sorts are ex­

changed for a single pound of the more precious gum of Borneo and Sumatra
(RaynaT. Hist. Philosoph. torn,

j. p. 362—365. Dictionnaire d'Hist. Naturelle par Bomare; Miller's Gardener's
Dictionary.) These may he the

islands of the first climate from whence the Arabians imported their camphire
(Gengrapb. Nub. n. 34, 35.

D'Herbelot, p. 232.

f3) See Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 376, 377. I may credit the fact,
without believing the prophecy.

(4) The most considerable ruins of Assyria are the tower of Belus at Babylon,
and the hall of Chosroes at

Ctesiphon: they have been visited by that vain and curious traveller, Pietro
della Vale (torn. i. p. 713—718.731

^735.) '

(5) Consult the article of Coi/fah in the Bibliotheque of d'Herbelot (p. 277,
278. and the second volume of

Hockley's History, particularly p. 40. and 153.

(6) See the article Nehavend, in d'Herbelot, p. 667,668. and Voyages en
Turqrtie et en Perse, par Otter, torn.

i. n. 191.

