THE DECLINE AND FALL

of Muhomct, was numbered among the ansars, or auxiliaries, of Medina, who
shel­

tered the head of the flying prophet. In his youth he fought at Beder and
Ohud,

under the holy standard: in his mature age he was the friend and follower of
Ali;

and the last remnant of his strength and life was consumed in a distant and
dan­

gerous war against the enemies ot the Koran. His memory was revered; but the

place of his burial was neglected and unknown, during a period of seven
hundred

and eighty years, till the conquest of Constantinople by Mahomet the Second. A

seasonable vision (for such are the manufacture of every religion) revealed
the

holy spot at the foot of the walls and the bottom of the harbour; and the
mosch

of Avub has been deservedly chosen for the simple and martial inauguration of
the

Turkish sulta-.is.(l)

The event of the siege revived, both in the east and west, the reputation of
the

Roman arms, and cast a momentary shade over the glories of the Saracens. The

Greek ambassador was favourably received at Damascus, in a general council of

the emirs or Koreish; a peace, or truce, of thirty years, was ratified between
the

two empires; and the stipulation of an annual tribute of fifty horses of a
noble breed,

fifty slaves, and three thousand pieces Oi gold, degraded the majesty of the
com­

mander of the faithful. (2) The aged caliph was desirous of possessing his
domi­

nions, and ending his days in tranquillity and repose; while the Moors and
Indians

trembled at his name, his palace and city of Damascus was insulted by the Mar-

daites, or Maronites, of mount Libanus, the firmest barrier of the empire,
till they

were disarmed and transplanted by the suspicious policy of the Greeks.(3) Af­

ter the revolt of Arabia and Persia, the house of Ommiyah(4) was reduced to
the

kingdoms of Syria and Egypt; their distress and fear enforced their compliance

with the pressing demands of the Christians; and the tribute was increased to
a

slave, a horse, and a thousand pieces of gold, for each of the three hundred
and

sixty-five days of the solar year. But as soon B3 the empire was again united
by

the arms and policy of Abdalmalek, he disclaimed a badge of servitude not less

injurious to his conscience than to his pride; he discontinued the payment of
the

tribute; and the resentment of the Greeks was disabled from action by the mad

tyranny of the second Justinian, the just rebellion of his subjects, and the
fre­

quent change of his antagonists and successors. Till the reign of Abdalma­

lek, the Saracens had been content with the free possession of the Persian and

Roman treasures, in the coin of Chosroes and Ca:sar. By the command of that

caliph, a national mint was established, both of silver and gold, and the
inscrip­

tion of the dinar, though it might be censured by some timorous casuists, pro­

claimed the unity of the God of Mahomet.(5) tinder the reign of the caliph

Waled, the Greek language and characters were excluded from the accounts

of the public revenue.(6) If this change was productive of the invention or
fa­

miliar use of our present numerals, the Arabic or Indian ciphers, as they are

commonly styled, a regulation of office has promoted the most important disco-
'

veriesof arithmetic, algebra, and the mathematical sciences.(7)

Whilst the caliph Waled sat idle on the throne of Damascus, while his lieute-

(1) Demetrius Canfcmh's Hist.of the Othman empire, 105,106. Rycant's State of
(lie Ottoman Empire,p.

10, 11. Voyages de Thevenot, part. 1. p. 189. The Christians, who suppose that
the martyr Abu Ayub is vul­

garly confounded with the patriarch Job, betray their own ignorance rather
than that of the Turks.

(2) Theophanes, though a Greek, deserves credit for these tributes
(Chronograph, p. 295,296. 300,301.) which

are confined, with some variation, by the Arabic History of Abulpharagius
(Dynast, p. 128. vers. Poeock.)

(3) The censureof Theophanes is just and pointed, Vu/Miittfv JvvewTii*?
ttxpvrwztrx; .... irxvhw*

wiTovstv vt P«nwn« us, tvv ApxBw ft=zpt rev me. (Chronograph, p. 302, 303.)
The series of these events may te

traced in the Annals of Theophanes, and in the Abridgment of (he patriarch
Nieephorot, p. 22—24.

(4) These domestic revolutions are related in a clear and natural style, in
the second volume of Oekley's Hii-

tory of the Saracens, p. 253—370. Resides our printed authors, he draws his
materials from the Arabic MSS.ot"

Oxford, which he would have mote deeply searched, had he bern confined to the
Bodleian library instead of

the city jail; a fate how unworthy of the man and of his countn !

(5) Elmacin, who dates the first coinage A. H. 76, A. D. 695, live or *\x
years Inter tlian the Greek historians,

has compared the weight of the hest or common gold dinar, to the dracham or
dirhem of Egypt, (p. 77.) which

may be equal to two pennies (forty-right grains) of our Troy weight, (Hooper's
Inquiry into ancient Mn-

sures, p. 24—36.) and equivalent to eight shillings of our sterling money.
From the tame Elmaciii and the

Arabian phyticiam, some dinars, as high as two dirhems, as low as half a
dirhem.may be deduced. The piece

of silver was the dirhem,bo(h in value and weight: but an old, though fair
coin, struck at Waset, A. H. 88, and

preserved in the Bodlein library, wants fuur grains of the Cairo standard.
(See the Modern Univ. History,

torn. i. p. J48. of the French Translation.)

tail/ iJ.tjCjJt', tirnSn mSvvxtov Tfj IXltVw* y\o)(r<rii ^cvmJ:*, » <Vweoo<,
>) -rpiMrTtf, tj Cum t'U»<ru t) Tptx ypnfivixi.

Theophan. Chronograph, p. 314. This defect, if it really existed, must have
stimulated the ingenuity of the

Arabs to invent or borrow.

(7) According to a new, though probable notion, maintained byM. de Villoison,
(Anecdota Green. tom.i;-

p. 152—157.) our ciphers are not of Indian or Arabic invention. They were used
bv the Greek and Latin arith­

metician* long before the age of Boethius. After the extinction of sc'ience in
the*west, they were adopted l>v

the Arabic versions from the original MSS. and restored to the Latins about
the eleventh centurv.

