OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 403

seas and lands from such a formidable adversary. Their mutual designs or
decla­

rations of offensive war evaporated without effect; but instead of opening a
door to

the conquest of Europe, Spain was dissevered from the trunk of the monarchy,

engaged in perpetual hostility with the east, and inclined to peace and
friendship

with the Christian sovereigns of Constantinople and France. The example of the

Ommiades was imitated by the real or fictitious progeny of Ali, the Edrissites
of

Mauritania, and the m6re powerful Fatimites of Africa and Egypt. In the tenth

century, the chair of Mahomet was disputed by three caliphs or commanders of

the faithful, who reigned at Bagdad, Cairoan, and Cordova, excommunicated

each other, and agreed only in a principle of discord, that a secretary is
more

odious and criminal than an unbeliever. (1)

Mecca was the patrimony of the line of Hashem, yet the Abbassides were

never tempted to reside either in the birth-place or the city of the prophet.
Da­

mascus was disgraced by the choice, and polluted with the blood, of the Om­

miades; and after some hesitation, Almansor, the brother and successor of
Saffah,

laid the foundations of Bagdad,(2) the imperial seat of his prosperity during
a

reign of five hundred years. (3) The chosen spot is on the eastern bank of the

Tigris, about fifteen miles above the ruins of Modain: the double wall was of
a cir­

cular form; and such was the rapid increase of a capital, now dwindled to a
pro­

vincial town, that the funeral of a popular saint might be attended by eight
hun­

dred thousand men and sixty thousand women of Bagdad and the adjacent vil­

lages. In this city of fieace,(4) amidst the riches of the east, the
Abbassides soon

disdained the abstinence and frugality of the first caliphs, and aspired to
emulate

the magnificence of the Persian kings. After his wars and buildings, Almansor

left behind him in gold and silver about thirty millions sterling;(5) and this
trea­

sure was exhausted in a few years by the vices or virtues of his children. His
son

Mahadi, in a single pilgrimage to Mecca, expended six millions of dinars of
gold.

A pious and charitable motive may sanctify the foundation of cisterns and
cara-

vanseras, which he distributed along a measured road of seven hundred miles;
but

his train of camels, laden with snow, could serve only to astonish the natives
of

Arabia, and to refresh the fruits and liquors of the royal banquet. (6) The
cour­

tiers would surely praise the liberality of his grandson Almamon, who gave
away

four-fifths of the income of a province, a sum of two millions four hundred
thou­

sand gold dinars, before he drew his foot from the stirrup. At the nuptials of
the

same prince, a thousand pearls of the largest size were showered on the head
of

the bnde,(7) and a lottery of lands and houses displayed the'eapricious bounty
of

fortune. The glories of the court were brightened rather than impaired in the

decline of the empire; and a Greek ambassador might admire or pity the magni­

ficence of the feeble Moctader. " The caliph's whole army," says the historian

Abulfeda, " both horse and foot, was under arms, which together made a body of

one hundred and sixty thousand men. His state-officers, the favourite slaves,
stood

near him in splendid apparel, their belts glittering with gold and gems. Near

(1) I shall not stop to refute the strange errors and fancies of Sir William
Temple, (his works, vol. iii. p. 371—

374, (octavo edition) and Voltaire (Histoire Generale,c. 28. torn. ii. p.
134,125. edition de Lausanne,) concerning

the division of the Saracen empire. The mistakes of Voltaire proceeded from
the want of knowledge or re­

flection: but Sir William was deceived by a Spanish impostor, who has framed
an apocryphal history ofthe con­

quest of Spain by the Arabs.

(2) The geographer d'Anville, (I'Euphrate et leTigre, p. 121—123.) and the
orientalist UUerbelot, (Dibiio-

Tlieque, p. 107, 108) may suffice for the knowledge or Bagdad. Our travellers,
Pietro della Valle, torn. i. p.

688—098.) Tavernier, (torn. i. p. 230—238.) Thevenot, (part ii. p. 209—212.)
Otter, (torn. i. p. 162— ins.) and

Niebuhr, (Voyage en Arabie, torn. ii. p. 239—271.) have seen only its deeay:
and the Nubian (geographer, (p.

£04.) and the travelling Jew, Benjamin of Tudela, (ttinerarium,p. 112—123.) a
Const. l'Empereur, apud Elze­

vir. Ifi33) are the only writers of my acquaintance who have known Bagdad
under the reign ofthe Abbassides.

(3) The foundations of Bagdad were laid A. H. 14*. A. D. 762. Mostatern, the
last of the Abbassides, was

taken and put to death by the Tartars, A. H. 656, A. D. 12.38, the 20th of
February.

(4) Medinatal Salem, Dar al Salem. Urbs pacis, or, as is more neatly
compounded by the Byzantine writers,

K.puwiroXis (Irenopolis.) There is some dispute concerning the etymology of
Bagdad, but the first syllable is

allowed to signify a garden in the Persian tongue; the garden of Dad, a
Christian hermit, whose cell had been

the only habitation on the spot.

(5) Reliquit in acrario sexcenties millies mille stateres, et quater et vicies
millies mille aureos aureos. Elma-

cin, Hist. Saracen, p. 126. I have reckoned the gold pieces at <-ighl
shillings, and Ihe proportion to the silver as

twelve to one. But I will never answer for the numbers of Erpenius; and the
Latins are scarcely above the

aavages in the language of arithmetic.

(6) D'Herbelot, p. 530. Abulfeba, p. 154. Nivem Meceam apportavit, rem ibi aut
nunquam aut rarissime

T'(7) Abulfeda, p. 184.189. desciibea the splendour and liberality of Almamon.
Milton has alluded to this ori­

ental custom:

—Or where the gorgeous east. v. ith richest hand,

Showers on her kings barbaric pearls and gold,

1 have used the modern word lottery, to express the miisilia of the Roman
CDiperars, wluah entitfe to some

prize the aersoD who caught them, as they were thrown among the ctowd.

