OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2 05

cona, Crotona, Centumcellss, resisted the assaults of Totila. Sicily was
reduced

by the zeal of Artaban, and the Gothic navy was defeated near the coast of the

Hadriatic. The two fleets were almost equal, forty-seven to fifty galleys: the
vic­

tory was decided by the knowledge and dexterity of the Greeks; but the ships

were so closely grappled, that only twelve of the Goths escaped from this
unfortu­

nate conflict. They affected to depreciate an element in which they were un­

skilled, but their own experience confirmed the truth of a maxim, that the
master

of the sea will always acquire the dominion of the land.(l)

After the loss of Germanus, the nations were provoked to smile, by the strange

intelligence, that the command of the Roman armies was given to a eunuch.

But the eunuch Narses(2) is ranked among the few who have rescued that hap­

py name from the contempt and hatred of mankind. A feeble diminutive body

concealed the soul of a statesman and a warrior. His youth had been employ­

ed in the management of the loom and distaff, in the cares of the household,

and the service of female luxury; but while his hands were busy, he secretly
ex­

ercised the faculties of a vigorous and discerning mind. A stranger to the
schools

and the camp, he studied in the palace to dissemble, to flatter, and to
.persuade;

and as soon as he approached the person of the emperor, Justinian listened
with

surprise and pleasure to the manly counsels of his cnamberlain and private
trea­

surer.^) The talents of Narses were tried and improved in frequent embassies;

he led an army into Italy, acquired a practical knowledge of the war, and the
coun­

try, and presumed to strive with the genius of Belisarius. Twelve years after
his

return, the eunuch was chosen to achieve the conquest which had been left im­

perfect by the first of the Roman generals. Instead of being dazzled by vanity
or

emulation, he seriously declared, that unless he were armed with an adequate

force, he would never consent to risk his own glory, and that of his
sovereign.

Justinian granted to the favourite, what he might nave denied to the hero; the

Gothic war was rekindled from its ashes, and the preparations were not unwor­

thy of the ancient majesty of the empire. The key of the public treasure was
put

into his hand, to collect magazines, to levy soldiers, to purchase arms and
horses,

to discharge the arrears of pay, and to tempt the fidelity of the fugitives
and de­

serters. The troops of Germanus were still in arms; they halted at Salona in
the

expectation of a new leader; the legions of subjects and allies were created
by the

well-known liberality of the eunuch Narses. The king of the Lombards(-t)
satis­

fied or surpassed the obligations of a treaty, by lending two thousand two
hunirtxl

of his ibravest warriors, who were followed by three thousand of their martial
at­

tendants. Three thousand Heruli fought on horseback under Philemuth, their

native chief; and the noble Aratus, who adopted the manners and discipline of

Rome, conducted a band of veterans of the same nation. Dagistheus was released

from prison to command the Huns; and Kobad, the grandson and nephew of the

great king, was conspicuous by the regal tiara at the head of his faithful
Persians,

who had devoted themselves to the fortunes of their prince. (5) Absolute in
the

exercise of his authority, more absolute in the affection of his troops,
Narses led

a numerous and gallant army from Philippolis to Salona, from whence he coasted

the eastern side of the Hadriatic as far as the confines of Italy. His
progress was

checked. The east could n^supply vessels capable of transporting such multi­

tudes of men and horses. Tto Franks, who in the general confusion, had usurp­

ed the gTeater part of the Venetian province, refused a free passage to the
friends

of the Lombards. The station of Verona was occupied by Teias, with the flower

of the Gothic forces; and that skilful commander had overspread the adjacent

country with the fall of woods and the inundation of waters. (6) In this
perplex-

(1) The third book of Procopius is terminated by the death of Germanus (Add.
lib. iv. c. 23—26.)

(2) Procopius relates the whole series of the second Gothic war, and the
victory of Narses (lib. iv. c. 21. 26-*

35.) A splendid scene! Among; the six subjects of epie poetry which Tasso
revolved in his mind, he hesitated

between the conquests of Italy by Belisarius and by Narses (Hayley's Works,
vol. iv. p. 70.)

,(3) The country of Narses is unknown, since he must not be confounded with
the Persarmenian. Proen-

pius styles him (Goth. lib. ii. c. 13.) Paul Warnefrid (lib. 3* P- 776.)
Chartula-

riua: Marcel li mis adds the name of Cubicularius. In an inscription on .he
Salarian bridge he is entitled Ex-

c/mral, Es-praepositus, Cubiculi Patricius(Mascou,Hist. of the Germans, lib.
xiii. c.25.) The law of Theo-

dosius against eunuchs was obsolete or abolished (Annotation 20.;) but the
foolish prophecy of the Romans

subsided in full vigour (Procop. lib. iv. c. SI.)

_ (4) Paul Warnefrid, the Lombard, records with complacency the succour,
service, and honourable dismis­

sion of his. countrymen—reipublicjR Romanic adversus xmulos adjutor.'s fnerant
(lib. ii. c. i. p. 774. edit. Grot.)

lam surprised that Alboin, their martial king-, did not lead his subjects in
person.

(5) He was, if not an impostor, the son of the blind Zanies, saved by
companion, and educated iu the By­

zantine court by the various motiw's of policy, pride, and genealogy (Procop.
Persic, lib. i. c. 33.)

In the time of Augustus, and in the niddlc ages, the whole waste horn Aquileia
to Uarenna, was ci-

Vol. HI. 14

