OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. r,

their game without the apprehension of an enemy. On the opposite bank the am­

bassadors descried a thousand Armenian horse, who appeared to guard the pas-

Sage of the Euphrates. The tent of Belisarius was of the coarsest linen, the
sim­

ple equipage of a warrior, who disdained the luxury of the east. Around his
tent,

the nations who marched under his standard were arranged with skilful
confusion.

The Thracians and Illyrians were posted in the front, the Heruli and Goths^in

the centre; the prospect was closed by the Moors and Vandals, and their loose

array seemed to multiply their numbers. Their dress was light and active: one

soldier carried a whip, another a sword, a third a bow, a fourth perhaps a
battle-

axe, and the whole picture exhibited the intrepidity of the troops and the
vigi­

lance of the general. Chosroes was deluded by the address, and awed by the

genius, of the lieutenant of Justinian. Conscious of the merit, and ignorant
of

the force, of his antagonist, he dreaded a decisive battle in a distant
country, from

whence not a Persian might return to relate the melancholy tale. The great
king

hastened to repass the Euphrates; and Belisarius pressed his retreat, by
affecting

to oppose a measure so salutary to the empire, and which could scarcely have
been

prevented by an army of a hundred thousand men. Envy might suggest to igno­

rance and pride, that the public enemy had been suffered to escape: but the
Afri­

can and Gothic triumphs are less glorious than this safe and bloodless
victory, in

which neither fortune, nor the valour of the soldiers, can subtract any part
of the

general's renown. The second removal of Belisarius from the Persian to the
Ita­

lian war, revealed the extent of his personal merit, which had corrected or
sup­

plied the want of discipline and courage. Fifteen generals, without concert or

skill, led through the mountains of Armenia an army of thirty thousand Romans,

inattentive to their signals, their ranks, and their ensigns. Four thousand
Persians,

intrenched the camp of Dubis, vanquished, almost without a combat, this disor­

derly multitude; their useless arms were scattered along the road, and their
horses

sunk under the fatigue of their rapid flight. But the Arabs of the Roman party

prevailed over their brethren; the Armenians returned to their allegiance; the

cities of Dara and Edessa resisted a sudden assault and a regular siege, and
the

calamities of war were suspended by those of pestilence. A tacit or formal
agree­

ment between the two sovereigns, protected the tranquillity of the eastern
frontier;

and the arms of Chosroes were confined to the Colchian or Lazic war, which has

been too minutely described by the historians of the times. (1)

The extreme length of the Euxine sea,(2) from Constantinople to the mouth of

the Phasis, may be computed as a voyage of nine days, and a measure of seven

hundred miles. From the Iberian Caucasus the most lofty and craggy mountains

of Asia, that river descends with such oblique vehemence, that, in a short
space,

it is traversed by one hundred and twenty bridges. Nor does the stream become

placid and navigable, till it reaches the town of Sarapana, five days' journey
from

the Cyrus, which flows from the same hills, but in a contrary direction, to
the

Caspian lake. The proximity of these rivers has suggested the practice, or at

least the idea, of wafting the precious merchandise of India down the Oxus,
over

the Caspian, up the Cyrus, and with the current of the Phasis into the Euxine

and Mediterranean seas. As it successively collects the streams of the plain
of

Colchos, the Phasis moves with diminished speed, though accumulated weight.

At the mouth it is sixty fathoms deep and half a league broad, but a small
woody-

island is interposed in the midst of the channel: the water, so soon as it has
depo­

sited an earthy or metallic sediment, floats on the surface of the waves, and
is no

longer susceptible of corruption. In a course of one hundred miles, forty of

which are navigable for large vessels, the Phasis divides the celebrated
region of

Colchos,(3) or Mingrelia,(4) which, on three sides, is fortified by the
Iberian and

(1) The Lazic war, the contest of Rome and Persia on the Phasis, is tediously
spun through many a pace

of Proccpius (Persic, lib. ii. c. 15. 17. 28—30.,) Gothic, (lib. iv. c.
7—16.,) and Agathias (lib. 2—4. p. 55—132.

111.)

(2) The Periplus, or circumnavigation of the Euxine sea, was described in
Latin by Sallnst, and in Greek

by Arrian. 1. The former work, which no longer exists, has been restored by
the singular diligence of M. de

Brasses, first president of the parliament of Dijon (Hist, de la Republique
Romaine. torn. ii. lib. iii. p. 199—

298.,) who ventures to assume the character of the Roman historian. His
description of (lie Emineis ingeni­

ously formed of alt the fragments of the original, and of all the Greeks and
Latins whom Sallust might copy

or by whom he might be copied; and the merit of the execution atones for (he
whimsical design. 2. The Peri-

plus of Arrian is addressed to the emperor Adrian (in Geograph. Minor. Hudson,
torn, i.,) and contains what­

ever the governor of Pontus had seen, from Trebizond to Dioscuriat; whatever
he had heard from Dioscnrias

*o the Danube; and whatever he knew from the Danube to Trebizond.

(3) Besides many occasional hints from the poets, historians, &c. of
antiquity, we may consult the geographi-

*cal descriptions of Colchos, by Strabo (lib. xi. p. 760—765.) and Pliny (Hist. Natur. 6.5.19, &c.)

(4) I shall quote, and have used, three modern descriptions of Mingrelia and
the adjacent countries.. 1. Of

