OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

6istance, that he yielded to the consent of the catholic world. (1) His enmity
to

the Byzantine pontiffs(2) was a sense of interest, not a sally of passion: he
envied

their fortunate station in the sunshine of the imperial court; and he dreaded
their

upstart ambition, which oppressed the metropolitans of Europe and Asia,
invaded

the provinces of Antioch and Alexandria, and measured their diocess by the
limits

of the empire. The long moderation of Atticus, the mild usurper of the throne

of Chrysostom, suspended the animosities of the eastern patriarchs; but Cyril
was

at length awakened by the exaltation of a rival more worthy of his esteem and
ha­

tred. After the short and troubled reign of Sisinnius bishop of
Constantinople,

the factions of the clergy and people were appeased by the choice of the
emperor,

who, on this occasion, consulted the voice of fame, and invited the merit of a

stranger. Nestorius, (3) a native of Germanicia, and a monk of Antioch, was
re­

commended by the austerity of his life, and the eloquence of his sermons; but
the

first homily which he preached before the devout Theodosius, betrayed the
acri­

mony and impatience of his zeal. " Give me, O Csesar!" he exclaimed, " give

me the earth purged of heretics, and I will give you in exchange the kingdom
of

heaven. Exterminate with me, the heretics; and with you, I will exterminate

the Persians." On the fifth day, as if the treaty had been already signed, the
pa­

triarch of Constantinople discovered, surprised, and attacked a secret
conventicle

of the Arians: they preferred death to submission; the flames, that were
kindled

by their despair, soon spread to the neighbouring houses, and the triumph of
Nes-

torius was clouded by the name of incendiary. On either side of the
Hellespont,

his episcopal vigour imposed a rigid formulary of faith and discipline; a
chronolo­

gical error concerning the festival of Easter was punished as an offence
against

the church and state. Lydia and Caria, Sardes and Miletus, were purified with

the blood of the obstinate Quartodecimans; and the edict of the emperor, or
ra­

ther of the patriarch, enumerates three-and-twenty degrees and denominations
in

the guilt and punishment of heresy. (4) But the sword of persecution, which

Nestorius so furiously wielded, was soon turned against his own breast.
Religion

was the pretence; but, in the judgment of a cotemporary saint, ambition was
the

genuine motive of episcopal warfare.(5)

In the Syrian school, Nestorius had been taught to abhor the confusion of the

two natures, and nicely to discriminate the humanity of his master Christ from

the divinity of the Lord Jesus. (6) The blessed Virgin he revered as the
mother

of Christ, but his ears were offended with the rash and recent title of mother
of

God,(7) which had been insensibly adopted since the origin of the Arian
contro­

versy. From the pulpit of Constantinople, a friend of the patriarch, and
after­

wards the patriarch himself, repeatedly preached against the use or the abuse
of

a word(8) unknown to the apostles, unauthorized by the church, and which could

only tend to alarm the timorous, to mislead the simple, to amuse the profane,
and

to justify, by a seeming resemblance, the old geneology of Olympus. (9) In his

(1) He was deaf to the entreaties of Atticus of Constantinople, and of Isidore
of Petusuim, and yielded only

(if we may believe Nicepborns, lib. xiv. c. IS.) to the personal intercession
of the Virgin. Tet in his last years

he still muttered, that John Chrysostom had been justly condemned. (Tillemom,
Mem. Eccles. torn. xiv. p.

278—282. Baronius, Annal. Eccles. A. D. 412. No. 46—64.)

(2) See tfieir characters in the history of Socrates, (lib. vii. c. 25—28.)
their power and pretensions, in the huge

compilation of Thomassin. (Discipline de l*Eglise, torn. i. p. 80—91.)

(3) His elevation and conduct are described by Socrates, (lib. vii.c.
29—31.)and Marcellinus seems to have

applied the loquentise satis, sapientise parom, of Sallust.

(4) Cod. Theodos. lib. xvi. tit v. leg. 65. with the illustrations of
Baronius. (A. D. 428. No. 25, &c.) Gode-

froy (ad locum.) and Pagi. f Critica, torn, ii, p. 208.)

(5) Isidore of Pelusium. (lib. iv. epist. 57.) His words are strong and
scandalous—ri fl*<ywe££i?, a xse» vuv srepi

srpxyftx 01 soy x»» ttftrrrev SmQwveiv TrpmrTraiQumti utto $i*jtp£i4;
txl2ML%i\mutvQi. Isidore is a saint, but he ne­

ver became a bishop; and I half suspect, that the pride of Diogenes trampled
on the pride of Plato.

(8) La Croze (Christianisme des Indes. tom.i.p.44—53.) Thesaurus Epistolicus
La Crozianus, tons, iii.p.

276—280.) has detected the use of o Simnrn;, and, o xopiou; Itiirous, which,
in the fourth, fifth, and sixth cemu-

ries, discriminate the school of Diodorus of Tarsus and his Nestorian
disciples.

(7) 0sto)cous— Despara: as in zoology we familiarly speak of oviparous and
viviparous animals. It is not

easy to fix the invention of this word, which La Croze (Christianisme des
Indes, torn. i. p. 16.) ascribes to Ettse-

bius of Csesarea and the Arians. The orthodox testimonies are produced by
Cyril and Petavim: (Dogmat. Theo-

log. torn. v. lib. v. c. 15. p. 254, &c.) but the veracity of the saint is
questionable, and the epithet of flsoroxos so

easily slides from the margin to the text of a catholic MS.

(8) Basnage, in his Histoire de l'Eglise, a work of controversy (torn. i. p.
505.) justifies the mother, by the

blood of God. (Acts xx. 28. with Milt's various readings.) But the Greek MSS.
are far from unanimous; and

the primitive style of the blood of Christ is preserved in the Syriac version,
even in those copies which were

used by the Christians of St. Thomas on the coast of Malabar. (La Croze,
Christianisme des Indes, torn. i. p.

347.) The jealousy of the Nestorians and Monopysites has guarded the purity of
their text.

(9) The pagans of Egypt already laughed at the new Cybele of the Christians;
(Isidor. lib. i. epist. 54.) a let­

ter was forged in the name of Hypatia, to ridicule the theology of her
assassin. Synodicon, c. 216. in 4 torn.

Concil. p. 484.) In the article of Nutoritu, Bayte has scattered some loose
philosophy on the worship of the

Virgin JSsrr.

