354 THE DECLINE AND FALL

mascus, they reposed near the grove and fountain of Tabuc. Beyond that place,

Mahomet declined the prosecution of the war: he declared himself satisfied
with

the peaceful intentions; he was more probably daunted by the martial array of
the

emperor of the east. But the active and intrepid Caled spread around the
terror

of his name; and the prophet received the submission of the tribes and cities,
from

the Euphrates to Ailah, at the head of the Red Sea. To his Christian subjects,

Mahomet readily granted the security of their persons, the freedom of their
trade,

the property of their goods, and the toleration of their worship.(l) The
weakness

of their Arabian brethren had restrained them from opposing his ambition; the

disciples of Jeslfe were endeared to the enemy of the Jews; and it was the
interest

of a conqueror to propose a fair capitulation to the most powerful religion of
the

earth.

Till the age of sixty-three years, the strength of Mahomet was equal to the

temporal and spiritual fatigues of his mission. His epileptic fits, an absurd
calum­

ny of the Greeks, would be an object of pity rather than abhorrence,(2) but he

seriously believed that he was poisoned at Chaibar, by the revenge of a Jewish

female. (3) During four years, the health of the prophet declined; his
infirmities

increased; but his mortal disease was a fever of fourteen days, which deprived
him

by intervals of the use of reason. As soon as he was conscious of his danger,
he

edified his brethren by the humility of his virtue or penitence. " If there be
any

man," said the apostle from the pulpit, " whom I have unjustly scourged, I
submit

my own back to the lash of retaliation. Have I aspersed the reputation of a
Mus­

sulman? let him proclaim my faults in the face of the congregation. Has any
one

been despoiled of his goods? the little that I possess shall compensate the
princi­

pal and the interest of the debt." " Yes," replied a voice from the crowd, "I

am entitled to three drachms of silver." Mahomet heard the complaint,
satisfied

the demand, and thanked his creditor for accusing him in this world rather
than

at the day of judgment. He beheld with temperate firmness the approach of

death; enfranchised his slaves (seventeen men, as they are named, and eleven
wo­

men;) minutely directed the order of his funeral, and moderated the lamenta­

tions of his weeping friends, on whom he bestowed the benediction of peace.

Till the third day before his death, he regularly performed the function of

public prayer; the choice of Abubekcr to supply his place, appeared to mark

that ancient and faithful friend as his successor in the sacerdotal and regal
office;

but he prudently declined the risk and envy of a more explicit nomination. At
a

moment when his faculties were visibly impaired, he called for pen and ink to

write, or more properly to dictate a divine book, the sum and accomplishment
of

all his revelations: a dispute arose in the chamber, whether he should be
allowed

to supersede the authority of the Koran; and the prophet was forced to reprove

the indecent vehemence of his disciples. If the slightest credit may be
afforded

to the traditions of his wives and companions, he maintained in the bosom of
his

family, and to the last moments of his life, the dignity of an apostle, and
the faith

of an enthusiast; described the visits of Gabriel, who bade an everlasting
farewell

to the earth, and expressed his lively confidence, not only of the mercy, but
of

the favour of the Supreme Being. In a familiar discourse he had mentioned his

special prerogative, that the angel of death was not allowed to take his soul
till he

had respectfully asked the permission of the prophet. The request was granted;

and Mahomet immediately fell into the agony of his dissolution: his head was
re­

clined on the lap of Ayesnn, the best beloved of all his wives; he fainted
with the

violence of pain; recovering his spirits, he raised his eyes towards the roof
of the

(1) The Diploma oectiritatis Aiknsibus, is attested l>y Ahmed Ben Joseph, and
the author Libri Splendorum;

/ Gagnier, Not. ad Abulfedam, p. 125.) but Abulfeda himself, ns well as
Elmacin (Hist. Saraeen, p. 11.0 though

lie owns Mahomet's regard far the Christians (p. 13..) only mentions peace and
tribute. In the year 1630, Sio-

nita published at Paris the text and version of Mahomet's patent in favour of
the Christians; which was ad­

mitted and reprobated by the opposite taste of Salmatius and Grotins (Bayle,
Mahomet* Rem. A AO Hottinger

doubts of its authenticity (Hist. Orient, p. 237.;) Renaudot urges the consent
of the Mahometans (Hist. Patri­

arch. Ales. p. 109.;) but Mmheim (Hist. Eccles. p. 244.) shows the futility of
their opinion, and inclines to be­

lieve it spurious. Yet Abtilpharagius quotes the impostor's treaty with the
Nestorian patriarch (Asseman. Bi-

blioth. Orient, torn. ii. n_. 418.;) but Abulpharagius was primate of the
Jacobites.

(2) The epilepsy, or falling sickness of Mahomet, is asserted by Theophanes,
Zonaras, and the rest of the

Greeks; and is greedily swallowed by the gross bigotry of Hottinger (Hist.
Orient, p. 10,11.,) Prideanx (Life of

Mahomet, p. 12.,) and Maracci (torn. ii. Alcoran, p. 762, 763.) The titles
{the wrapped up* the covered) of two

chapters ot the Koran (73, 74.) can hardly be strained to such an
interpretation: the silence, the ignorance, of

the Mahometan commentators, is more conclusive than the most peremptory
denial; and the charitable side is

espoused by Ockley (Hist, of the Saracens, torn. i. p. 301..) Gagnier(ad
Abulfed. p. 9. Vie de Mahomet, torn. i.

p. 118.,) and Sale (Koran, p. 409—4740

(3) This poison, (more ignominious since it was offered as a test of his
prophetic knowledge) is frankly corv

leased by his zealous votaries, Abulfeda (p. 92.) and Al Jannabi (apud
Gagnier, torn. ii. r- 286—2880

