THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 24?

and to assert the right of a military election. They marched towards the
capital;

yet the clergy, the senate, and the people of Constantinople, adhered to the
cause

of Michael; and the troops and treasures of Asia might have protracted the
mis­

chiefs of civil war. But his humanity (by the ambitious it will be termed his

weakness) protested, that not a drop of Christian blood should be shed in his
quar­

rel, and his messengers presented the conquerors with the keys of the city and
the

palace. They were disarmed by his innocence and submission; his life and his
eyes

were spared; and the imperial monk enjoyed the comforts of solitude and reli­

gion above thirty-two years after he had been stripped of the purple and
separated

from his wife.

A rebel in the time of Nicephorus, the famous and unfortunate Bardanes, had

once the curiosity to consult an Asiatic prophet, who, after prognosticating
his fall,

announced the fortunes of his three principal officers, Leo the Armenian,
Michael

the Phrygian, and Thomas the Cappadocian, the successive reigns of the two
for­

mer, the fruitless and fatal enterprise of the third. This prediction was
verified,

or rather was produced by the event. Ten years afterwards, when the Thracian

camp rejected the husband of Procopia, the crown was presented to the same
Leo,

the first in military rank, and the secret author of the mutiny. As he
affected to

hesitate,—" With this sword," said his companion Michael, "I will open the
gates

of Constantinople to your imperial sway; or instantly plunge it into "your
bosom,

if you obstinately resist the just desires of your fellow-soldiers." The
compli­

ance of the Armenian was rewarded with the empire, and he reigned seven years

and a half under the name of Leo V. Educated in a camp, and ignorant both of

laws and letters, he introduced into his civil government the rigour and even
cru­

elty of military discipline; but if his severity was sometimes dangerous to
the in­

nocent, it was always formidable to the guilty. ■ His religious inconstancy
was taxed

by the epithet of Chameleon, but the catholics have acknowledged* by the voice

of a saint and confessors, that the life of the Iconoclast was useful to the
republic.

The zeal of his companion Michael was repaid with riches, honours, and
military

command; and his subordinate talents were beneficially employed in the public

service. Yet the Phrygian was dissatisfied at receiving as a favour a scanty
por­

tion of the imperial prize, which he had bestowed on his equal; and his
discontent,

which sometimes evaporated in a hasty discourse, at length assumed a more
threat­

ening and hostile aspect against a prince whom he represented as a cruel
tyrant.

That tyrant, however, repeatedly detected, warned, and dismissed the old com­

panion of his arms, till fear and resentment prevailed over gratitude; and
Michael,

after a scsutiny into his actions, was convicted of treason, and sentenced to
be

burnt alive in the furnace of the private baths. The devout humanity of the
em­

press Theophano was fatal to her husband and family. A solemn day, the twenty-

fifth of December, had been fixed for the execution; she urged, that the
anniver­

sary of the Saviour's birth would be profaned by this inhuman spectacle, and
Leo

consented with reluctance to a decent respite. But on the vigil of the feast,
his

sleepless anxiety prompted him to visit at the dead of night the chamber in
which

his enemy was confined: he beheld him released from his chain, and stretched
on

the jailor's bed in a profound slumber. Leo was alarmed at these signs of
securi­

ty and intelligence; but though he retired with silent steps, his entrance and
de­

parture were noticed by a .slave who lay concealed in a corner of the prison.
Un­

der the pretence of requesting the spiritual aid of a confessor, Michael
informed

the conspirators, that their lives depended on his discretion, and that a few
hours

were left to assure their own safety, by the deliverance of their friend and
coun­

try. On the great festivals a chosen band of priests and chanters was admitted

into the palace by a private gate to sing matins in the chapel; and Leo, who
re­

gulated with the same strictness the discipline of the choir and of the camp,
was

seldom absent from those early devotions. In the ecclesiastical habit, but
with

swords under their robes, the conspirators mingled with the procession, lurked
in

the angles of the chapel, and expected, as the signal of murder, the
intonation

of the first psalm by the emperor himself. The imperfect light, and the
unifor­

mity of dress, might have favoured his escape, while their assault was pointed

against a harmless priest; but they soon discovered their mistake, and encom­

passed on all sides the royal victim. Without a weapon and without a friend,
he

grasped a weighty cross, and stood at bay against the hunters of his life; but
as

he asked for mercy,—"This is the hour, not of mercy, but of vengeance," was

the inexorable reply. The stroke of a well-aimed sword separated from hisbodv

the right arm and the cross, and Leo the Armenian was slain at tne foot of the
altar.

