THE DECLINE AND FALL

people, and the assassin, in the fulness of power, was driven from his capital
into

voluntary and perpetual exile. Constans embarked for Greece; and, as if he

meant to retort the abhorrence which he deserved, he is said from the imperial

galley, to have spit against the walls of his native city. After passing the
winter

at Athens, he sailed to Tarentum in Italy, visited Rome, and concluded a long

pilgrimage of disgrace and sacrilegious rapine, by fixing his residence at
Syra­

cuse. But if Constans would fly from his people, he could not fly from
himself.

The remorse of his conscience created a phantom who pursued him by land and

sea, by day and by night; and the visionary Theodosius, presented to his lips
a cup

of blood, said, or seemed to say, Drink, brother, drink; a sure emblem of the
ag­

gravation of his guilt, since he had received from the hands of the deacon the
mys­

tic cup of the blood of Christ. Odious to himself and to mankind, Constans pe­

rished by domestic, perhaps by episcopal treason, in the capital of Sicily. A
ser­

vant who waited in the bath, after pouring warm water on his head, struck him

violently with the vase. He fell, stunned by the blow, and suffocated by the
wa­

ter; and his attendants, who wondered at the tedious delay, beheld with
indiffer­

ence the corpse of their lifeless emperor. The troops of Sicily invested with
the

purple an obscure youth, whose inimitable beauty eluded, and it might easily
elude,

the declining art of the painters and sculptors of the age.

Constans had left in the Byzantine palace three sons, the eldest of whom had

been clothed in his infancy with the purple. When the father summoned them

to attend his person in Sicily, these precious hostages were detained by the
Greeks,

and a firm refusal informed him that they were the children of the state. The

news of his murder was conveyed with almost supernatural speed from Syracuse

to Constantinople; and Constantine, the eldest of his sons, inherited his
throne

without being the heir of the public hatred. His subjects contributed, with
zeal

and alacrity, to chastise the guilt and presumption of a province which had
usurped

the rights of the senate and people: the young emperor sailed from the
Hellespont

with a powerful fleet; and the legions of Rome and Carthage were assembled un­

der his standard in the harbour of Syracuse. The defeat of the Sicilian tyrant
was

easy, his punishment just, and his beauteous head was exposed in the
hippodrome;

but I cannot applaud the clemency of a prince, who, among a crowd of victims,

condemned the son of apatrician, for deploring with some bitterness the
execution

of a virtuous father. The youth was castrated; he survived the operation, and

the memory of this indecent cruelty is preserved by the elevation of Germanus

to the rank of a patriarch and saint. After pouring this bloody libation on
his

father's tomb, Constantine returned to his capital, and the growth of his
young

beard during the Sicilian voyage, was announced by the familiar surname of Po-

gonatus, to the Grecian world. But his reign, like that of his predecessor,
was

stained with fraternal discord. On his two brothers, Heraclius and Tiberius,
he

had bestowed the title of Augustus; an empty title, for they continued to
languish

without trust or power in the solitude of the palace. At their secret
instigation,

the troops of the Anatolian theme or province approached the city on the
Asiatic

side, demanded for the royal brothers, the partition or exercise of
sovereignty,

and supported their seditious claim by a theological argument. They were
Chris­

tians, (they cried,) and orthodox catholics; the sincere votaries of the holy
and un­

divided Trinity. Since there are three equal persons in heaven, it is
reasonable

there should be three equal persons upon earth. The emperor invited these
learned

divines to a friendly conference; in which they might propose their arguments
to the

senate; they obeyed the summons; but the prospect of their bodies hanging on a
gib­

bet in the suburb of Galata, reconciled their companions to the unity of the
reign of

Constantine. He pardoned his brothers, and their names were still pronounced

in the public acclamations; but on the repetition or suspicion of a similar
offence,

the obnoxious princes were deprived of their titles and noses, in the presence
of

the catholic bishops who were assembled at Constantinople, in the sixth
general

synod. In the close of his life, Pogonatus was anxious only to establish the
right

of primogeniture: the hair of his two sons, Justinian and Heraclius, was
offered on

the shrine of St. Peter, as a symbol of their spiritual adoption by the pope;
but

the elder was alone exalted to the rank of Augustus and the assurance of the
em­

pire.

After the decease of his father, the inheritance of the Roman world devolved

to Justinian II. and the name of a triumphant lawgiver was dishonoured by the

vices of a'boy, who imitated his namesake onlv in the expensive luxury of
build­

ing. His passions were strong; his understanding was feeble; and he was
intoxi­

