■586 THE DECLINE AND FALL

of the next age, the fable was rejected by the contempt of historians(l) and
pc-

«ts,(2) and the tacit or modest censure of the advocates of the Roman church.
(3)

The popes themselves have indulged a smile at the credulity, of the vulgar,
(4)

but a false and obsolete title still sanctifies their reign; and by the same
fortune

which has attended the decretals and the Sibylline oracles, the edifice has
subsist­

ed after the foundations have been undermined.

While the popes established in Italy their freedom and dominion, the images,

the first cause of their revolt, were restored in the eastern empire.(5) Under
the

reign of Constantine V. the union of civil and ecclesiastical power had
overthrown

the tree, without extirpating the root, of superstition. The idols, for such
they were

now held, were secretly cherished by the order and the sex most prone to devo­

tion: and the fond alliance of the monks and females, obtained a final victory
over

the reason and authority of man. Leo IV. maintained with less rigour the
religion

of his father and grandfather; but his wife, the fair and ambitious Irene, had
im­

bibed the zeal of the Athenians, the heirs of the idolatry, rather than the
philoso­

phy, of their ancestors. During the life of her husband, these sentiments were

inflamed by danger and dissimulation, and she could only labour to protect and

promote some favourite monks whom she drew from their caverns, and seated on

the metropolitan thrones of the east. But as soon as she reigned in her own
name

and that of her son, Irene more seriously undertook the ruin of the
Iconoclasts; and

the first step of her future persecution, was a general edict for liberty of
conscience.

In the restoration of the monks, a thousand images were exposed te the public
ve­

neration; a thousand legends were invented of their sufferings and miracles.
By

the opportunities of death or removal, the episcopal seats were judiciously
filled;

the most eager competitors for earthly or celestial favour, anticipated and
flattered

the judgment of their sovereign; and the promotion of her secretary Tarasius,
gave

Irene the patriarch of Constantinople, and the command of the oriental church.

But the decrees of a general council could only be repealed by a similar
assem­

bly;^) the Iconoclasts, whom she convened, were bold in possession, and averse

to debate; and the feeble voice of the bishops was re-echoed by the more
formidable

clamour of the soldiers and people of Constantinople. The delay and intrigues
of

a year, the separation of the disaffected troops, and the choice of Nice for a
second

orthodox synod, removed these obstacles; and the episcopal conscience was
again,

after the Greek fashion, in the hands of the prince. No more than eighteen
days

were allowed for the consummation of this important work: the Iconoclasts ap­

peared, not as judges, but as criminals or penitents; the scene was decorated
by the

legates of pope Hadrian and the eastern patriarch, (7) the decrees were framed
by

the president Tarasius, and ratified by the acclamations and subscriptions of
three

hundred and fifty bishops. They unanimously pronounced, that the worship of

images is agreeable to Scripture and reason, to the fathers and councils of
the

(1) See Guiccinrdini, a servant of the popes, in that long and valuable
digression, which has resumed its

place in the last edition, correctly published from the author's MS., and
printed in four volumes in quarto, un­

der the name of Friburgo, 1775w(Istoria d'ltalia, torn. i. p. 385—395.)

(2) The Paladin Astolpho found it in the moon, among the things that were lost
uponearth. (Orlando Furi-

010,34,80.)

Di van fiore ad un grand monte passa,

, Ch'ebbe gia buono odore, or p'uzza forte

Questo era il dono (se pero dir lace)

Che Constantino at buon Silvestro fece.

Yet this incomparable poem has been approved by a bull of Leo X.

(3) See Baronius. A. D. 324, no. 117—123. A. D. 1191, no. 51. &c. The cardinal
wishes to suppose that

Home was offered by Constantine, and refused by Silvester. The act of donation
he considers, strangely

enough, as a forgery of the Greeks.

(4) Baronius n'en dit guerres contre: encore en a Oil tropdit,et l'on vouloit
sans moi (Cardinal du Perron,)

qui 1'eropechai, eensurer certe partie de son histoire. J'en devisai un jour
avec le Pane, et il ne roe repondit

autre chose "che yolete! i Canonici la lenRono." i le desoit cn riant.
(Penoniana, p. 77.)

(5) The remaining history of images, from Irene to Theodora, is collected, for
the catholics, by Baronius

andPagi, (A. D. 780—840.) Katalis Alexander, (Hisr. N. T. seculuni viii.
Panoplia adversus Hseretieos, p.

118—173.) and Dupin: (liibliot. Eceles. torn. vi. p. 136—154.) for the
proteslantl, by Spanheim, (Hist. I mac. p.

SOS—639.) Basnage, (Hist, de I'Eglise, torn. i. p. 556—572. torn. ii. p.
1362—1385.) and Mosheim. (Institnt. Hist.

Eceles. secul. viii. et vx.) The protesiants, except Mosheim, are soured with
controversy; but the catholics,

except Dupin,are inflamed by the fury and superstition of the monks; and even
Le Beau, (Hist, du Bas em­

pire) a gentlenian and a scholar, is infected by the odious contaKion.

(6) Seethe Acts, in Greek and Latin, of the second council of Nice, with a
number of relative pieces, in the

seventh volume of the councils, p. 645—1600. A faithful version, with some
critical notes, would provoke, in

different readers, a sigh or a smile.

(7) The pope's legates were casual messengers, two priests without any special
commission, and who were

disavowed on their return. Some vagabond monks were persuaded by the catholics
to represent the oriental

patriarchs. This cunous anecdote is revealed by Theodore Studites, (epist.
i.38. in Sirmond. Opp. torn. v. p-

1319.) one Of the warmest Iconoclasts of the age.

