OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

king of the Franks and the Lombards asserted the inalienable rights of the em-

J)ire; and, in his life and death, Ravenna,(l) as well as Rome, was numbered
in the

ist of his metropolitan cities. The sovereignty of the exarchate melted away
In

the hands of the popes; they found in the archbishops of Ravenna a dangerous

and domestic rival;(2) the nobles and people disdained the yoke of a priest:
and, in

the disorders of the times, they could only retain the memory of an ancient
claim,

which, in a more prosperous age, they have revived and realized.

Fraud is the resource of weakness and cunning; and the strong, though ignorant

barbarian, was often entangled in the net of sacerdotal policy. The Vatican
and

Lateran were an arsenal and manufacture, which, according to the occasion,
have

produced or concealed a various collection of false or genuine, of corrupt or
suspi­

cious acts, as they tended to promote the interest of the Roman church. Before

the end of the eighth century, some apostolical scribe, perhaps the notorious
Isi­

dore, composed the decretals, and the donation of Constantine, the two magic
pil­

lars of ihe spiritual and temporal monarchy of the popes. This memorable dona­

tion was introduced to the world by an epistle of Hadrian I., who exhorts
Charle­

magne to imitate the liberality, and revive the name of the great
Constantine.(3)

According to the legend, the first of the Christian emperors was healed of the
le­

prosy, and purified in the waters of baptism, by St. Silvester, the Roman
bishop;

and never was physician more gloriously recompensed. His royal proselyte with­

drew from his seat and patrimony of St. Peter; declared his resolution of
founding

a new capital in the east; and resigned to the popes the free and perpetual
sove­

reignty of Rome, Italy and the provinces of the west. (4) This fiction was
pro­

ductive of the most beneficial effects. The Greek princes were convicted of
the

guilt of usurpation; and the revolt of Gregory was the claim of his lawful
inheri­

tance. The popes were delivered from their debt of gratitude: and the nominal

gifts of the Carlovingians were no more than the just and irrevocable
restitution of

a scanty portion of the ecclesiastical state. The sovereignty of Rome no
longer

depended on the choice of a fickle people; and the successors of St. Peter and
Con­

stantine were invested with the purple and prerogatives of the C^sars. So deep

was the ignorance and credulity of the times, that the most absurd of fables
was

received, with equal reverence, in Greece and in France, and is still enrolled

among the decrees of the canon law. (5) The emperors, and the Romans, were

incapable of discerning a forgery, that subverted their rights and freedom;
and the

only opposition proceeded from a Sabine monastery, which, in the beginning of

the twelfth century, disputed the truth and validity of the donation of
Constan­

tine. (6) In the revival of letters and liberty this fictitious deed was
transpierced

by the pen of Laurentius Valla, the pen of an eloquent critic and a Roman
patriot. (7)

His cotemporaries of the fifteenth century were astonished at his sacrilegious
bold­

ness; yet such is the silent and irresistible progress of reason, that before
the end

(1) Charlemagne solicited and obtained from the proprietor, Hadrian I., the
mosaics of the palace of Raven­

na, for the decoration of Aix-la-Chapelle. (Cod. Carotin, epist. 67. p. 223.)

(2) The popes often complain of the usurpation of Leo of Ravenna: (Codex
Carolin. epist. 51—23. p. 200—

205.) Si Corpus St. Andrea; fratrii germaui St. Pen i hie humasset, nequaqiiam
nos Romani pontifices sic sub-

jugassent. (Agnellus, Liber PontiGcalis, in Scriptures Rerum Ital. torn. ii.
pars 1. p. 107.)

(3) Piissimo Constantino maguo, per ejus largitatem S. R. Ecclesia elevataet
exaltataest, et potestatem in

his Hesperiac partibus largiri dignatus est .... Quiaecce novtis Constaminus
his temporibus, &c. (Codex

Carotin, epist. 49. in torn. iii. para 2* p. 105.) Pagi (Critica, A. D. 324,
no. 16.) ascribes them to an impostor of

the eighth century, who borrowed the name of St, Isidore: his humble title of
Peccatar was ignorantly. but

mptly, turned into Mercator: his merchandise was indeed profitable, and a few
sheets of paper were sold for

much wealth and power.

(4) Fahricius (Bibliot. Grace, torn. vi. p. 4—7.) has enumerated the several
editions of this act, in Greek and

Latin. The copy which Laurentius Vatla recites and refutes, appears to be
taken either from the spurious acts

of St. Silvester, or from Gratian's Decree, to which, according to him and
others, it has been surreptitiously

tacked.

(5) In the year 1059, it was believed (was it believed?) by pope Leo IX.
cardinal Peter Damianns, 5tc. Mu-

ratori places (Annali dTtalia, torn. ii. p. 23,24.) the fictitious donations
of Lewis the Pious, the Othos, &c. de

Donatione Constantini. Bee a Dissertation of Natalis Alexander, secolutn 4.
diss. 25. p. 335—350.

(6) See a large account of the controversy (A. D. 1105.) which arose from a
private law-suit, in the Chroni-

con. Farsene, (Script. Rerum Itaticarum, torn. ii. pars 2. p. 637, &c.) a
copious extrnct from the archives of

that Benedictine abbey. They were formerly accessible to curious foreigners.
(Le Blanc and Mabillon,) and

would have enriched the first volume of the Historia Monastica Italia of
Qmrini. But they are now impri­

soned (Muratori, Scriptures, R. I. torn. ii. pars 2. p. 269.) by the timid
policy of the court of Rome: and the fu­

ture cardinal yielded to the voice of authority and the whispers of ambition.
(Quirini, Comment, pars 2. p.

123—136.)

(7) I have read in the collection of Schardius. (de Potestate Imperial
Ecclesiastica. p. 734—780.) this ani­

mated discourse, which was composed by the author, A. D. 1440, six years after
the flight of pope Eugenius

IV. It is a most vehement party pamphlet: Valla justifies anil animates the
revolt of the Romans, and wonld

even approve the use of a dagger against their sacerdotal tyrant. Such a
critic might expeet the persecution

of the clergy; yet he made his peace,and isnuried in the Latent. (Bayle,
DictioDnaire Critique, Valla; Vossi-

us, de Histsficij Latiun, p. 580.)

