■* THE DECLINE AND FALL

men had not represented the perils of the shore, and the signs of an impending

tempest. Still ignorant of the revolution, they declined, however, the rash
at­

tempt of forcing the chain of the port; and the adjacent harbour and suburb of

Mandracium were insulted only by the rapine of a private officer who disobeyed

and deserted his leaders. But the imperial fleet, advancing with a fair wind,

steered through the narrow entrance of the Goletta, and occupied, in the deep

and oapacious lake of Tunis, a secure station about five miles from the
capital. (1)

No sooner was Belisarius informed of their arrival, than he despatched orders

that the greatest part of the mariners should be immediately landed to join
the

triumph, and to swell the apparent numbers of the Romans. Before he allowed

them to enter the gates of Carthage, he exhorted them, in a discourse worthy
of

himself and the occasion, not to disgrace the glory of their arms; and to
remem­

ber that the Vandals had been the tyrants, but that they were the deliverers
of the

Africans, who must now be respected as the voluntary and affectionate subjects
of

their common sovereign. The Romans marched through the streets iii close

ranks, prepared for battle if an enemy had appeared; the strict order
maintained

by the general, imprinted on their minds the duty of obedience; and in an age
in

which custom and impunity almost sanctified the abuse of conquest, the genius
of

one man repressed the passions of a victorious army. The voice of menace and

complaint was silent; the trade of Carthage was not interrupted; while Africa

changed her master and her government, the shops continued open and busy; and

the soldiers after sufficient guards had been posted, modestly departed to the

houses which were allotted for their reception. Belisarius fixed his residence
in

the palace; seated himself on the throne of Genseric; accepted and distributed

the barbaric spoil; granted their lives to the suppliant Vandals; and laboured
to re­

pair the damage which the suburb of Mandracium had sustained in the preceding

night At supper he entertained his principal officers with the form and
magnifi­

cence of a royal banquet. (2) The victor was respectfully served by the
captive

officers of the household; and, in the moments of festivity, when the
impartial

spectators applauded the fortune and merit of Belisarius, his envious
flatterers

secretly shed their venom on every word and gesture which might alarm the sus­

picions of a jealous monarch. One day was given to these pompous scenes,
which,

may not be despised as useless, if they attracted the popular veneration; but
the

active mind of Belisarius, which in the pride of victory could suppose a
defeat,

had already resolved that the Roman empire in Africa should not depend on the

chance of arms, or the favour of the people. The fortifications of Carthage
had

alone been exempted from the general proscription; but in the reign of ninety-
five

•years they were suffered to decay by the thoughtless and indolent Vandals. A
wiser

conqueror restored with incredible despatch the walls and ditches of the city.

His liberality encouraged the workmen; the soldiers, the mariners, and the
citi­

zens, vied with each other in the salutary labour; and Gelimer, who had feared
to

trust his person in an open town, beheld with astonishment and despair the
rising

strength of an impregnable fortress.

That unfortunate monarch, after the loss of his capital, applied himself to
col­

lect the remains of an army scattered, rather than destroyed, by the preceding

battle; and the hopes of pillage attracted some Moorish bands to the standard
of

Gelimer. He encamped in the fields of Bulla, four days'journey from Carthage j

insulted the capital, which he deprived of the use of an aqueduct; proposed a
high

reward for the head of every Roman; affected to spare the persons and property

of his African subjects, and secretly negotiated with the Anan sectaries and
the

confederate Huns, Under these circumstances, the conquest of Sardinia served

only to aggravate his distress; he reflected with the deepest anguish, that he
had

wasted, in that useless enterprise, five thousand of his bravest troops; and
he read,

with grief and shame, the victorious letters of his brother Zano, who
expressed a

sanguine confidence that the king, after the example of their ancestors, had
alrea­

dy chastised the rashness of the Roman invader. "Alas! my brother," replied

Gelimer, " Heaven has declared against our unhappy nation. While you have

(t) The neighbourhood of Carthage, the sea, the land, and (he rivers, are
changed almost at much as the

works of man. The isthmus, or neck of the city, is now confounded with the
continent; the harbour is a dry

Slain; and the lake, or stagnum, no more than a morass, with six or seven feet
water in the mid channel. See

'Anville (Geographic Ancienne, torn. iii. p. 82.,) (Shaw's Travels, p. 77—84.)
Marmol (Description de

PAfrique, torn, ii. p. 465.,) and Thuanust (58. 12. tom.iti. p. 334.)

(2) From Delphi, the name of Delphieum was given, both in Greek and Latin, to
a tripod; and, by an

easy analogy, the same appellation was extended at Rome, Constantinople, and
Carthage, to the royal ban-

quetting room. (Procopias, Vandal, lib. i. c. 21. Ducange, Gloss. Gnec. p.
277. AtKfnm, ad Alexiad, p. 412.)

