OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

retaliated and redoubled on the heads of the Persians. (1) The general who had

restored Chosroes to the throne still commanded in the east: and the name of
Nar-

«es was the formidable sound with which the Assyrian mothers were accustomed

to terrify their infants. It is not improbable, that a native subject of
Persia should

encourage his master and his friend to deliver and possess the provinces of
Asia.

It is still more probable, that Chosroes should animate his troops by the
assurance

that the sword which they dreaded the most would remain in its scabbard, or be

drawn in their favour. The hero could not depend on the faith of a tyrant; and

the tyrant was conscious how little he deserved the obedience of a hero:
Narses

was removed from his military command; he reared an independent standard at

Hierapolis in Syria: he was betrayed by fallacious promises, and burnt alive
in the

market-place of Constantinople. Deprived of the only chief whom they could

fear or esteem, the bands which he had led to victory were twice broken by the

cavalry, trampled by the elephants, and pierced by the arrows of the
barbarians;

and a great number of the captives were beheaded on the field of battle by the

sentence of the victor, who might justly condemn these seditious mercenaries
as

the authors or accomplices of the death of Maurice. Under the reign of Phocas,

the fortifications of Merdin, Dara, Amida, and Edessa, were successively be­

sieged, reduced and destroyed by the Persian monarch: he passed the Euphrates,

occupied the Syrian cities, Hierapolis, Chalcis, and Berrhxa or Aleppo, and
soon

encompassed the walls of Antiocti with his irresistible arms. The rapid tide
of

success discloses the decay of the empire, the incapacity of Phocas, and the
dis­

affection of his subjects; and Chosroes provided a decent apology for their
submis­

sion or revolt by an impostor who attended his camp, as the son of Maurice,(2)

and the lawful heir of the monarchy.-

The first intelligence from the east which Heraclius received,(3) was that of

the loss of Antioch; but the aged metropolis, so often overturned by
earthquakes

and pillaged by the enemy, could supply but a small and languid stream of
trea­

sure and Mood. The Persians were equally successful and more fortunate in the

sack of Cxsarea, the capital of Cappadocia; and as they advanced beyond the

ramparts of the frontiers, the boundary of ancient war, they found a less
obstinate

resistance and a more plentiful harvest. The pleasant vale of Damascus has
been

adorned in every age with a royal city: her obscure felicity has hitherto
escaped

the historian of the Roman empire: but Chosroes reposed his troops in the
para­

dise of Damascus before he ascended the hills of Libanus, or invaded the
cities

of the Phenician-coast. The conquest of Jerusalem, (4) which had been
meditated

by Nushirvan, was achieved by the zeal and avarice of his grandson; the ruin
of

the proudest monument of Christianity was vehemently urged by the intolerant

spirit of the Magi; and he could enlist, for this holy warfare, an army of six
and

twenty thousand Jews, whose furious bigotry might compensate, in some degree,

for the want of valour, and discipline. After the reduction of Galilee, and
the

region beyond the Jordan, whose resistance appears to have delayed the fate of

the capital, Jerusalem itself was taken by assault. The sepulchre of Christ,
and

the stately churches of Helena and Constantine, were consumed, or at least da­

maged, by the flames; the devout offerings of three hundred years were rifled
in

one sacrilegious day; the patriarch Zachariah, and the true cross, were
transport­

ed into Persia; and the massacre of ninety thousand Christians is imputed to
the

Jews and Arabs who swelled the disorder of the Persian march. The fugitives

of Palestine were entertained at Alexandria by the charity of John the
archbishop,

(1) We mast now, for some apes, take our leave of cotemporary historians, and
descend, if it be a descent,

from the affectation of rhetoric, to the rude simplicity of chronicles and
abridgments. Those of Theophanes

(Chronograph, p. 244—279.( and Nicephorus, p. 316, supply a regular, but
imperfect series of the Persian

war! and for any additional facts I quote my special authorities. Theophanes.a
cotmier who became a monk,

was born A. 1). 743; Nicephorus. patriarch of Constantinople, who died A. 1).
829, was somewhat younger:

they both sutTered in the cause of images. Hankkis de Scriptorihus Ryzantinis,
p. 200—246.

(2) The Persian historians have been themselves deceived: but Theopbanes (p.
244.) accuses Chosroes of

the fraud and falsehood; and Eutychius believes (Annal. torn. ii. p. 21 J.)
thai (he son of Maurice, who was

saved from the assassins, lived and died a monk on mount Sinai.

(3) Eutychius dates all the losses of the empire under the reign of Phocas, an
error which saves the ho­

nour of Heraclius, whom he brings not from Carthage, but Salonica, with a
fleet laden with vegetables for the

relief of Constantinople, f Anna?, torn. ii. p. 223, 2240 The other Christians
of the east. Barhebraus, (apud

Asseman. Bibliothec. Oriental, torn. iii. p. 412,413.) Elmacin, (Hist.
Saracen, p. 13—16.) Abulpharagius. (Dy­

nast, p. 98,99,) are more sincere and accurate. The years of the Persian war
are disposed in the Chrono­

logy of Pagi.

(4) On the eonquest of Jerusalem, an event so interesting to the church, see
the Annals of Eutychius, torn,

ii. p. 212—223.) and the lamentations of the monk Antiochus, apud Baronium,
Annal. Eccles. A. D. 614. No

16—26.) whose one hundred and twenty-nine homilies are still extant, if what
no one reads may be said to be

extant

