134 THE DECLINE AND FALL

cline of the Roman empire, the proud distinctions of the republic were
gradually

abolished, and the reason or instinct of Justinian completed the simple form
of an

absolute monarchy. The emperor could not eradicate the popular reverence

which always waits on the possession of hereditary wealth, or the memory of
fa­

mous ancestors. He delighted to honour with titles and emoluments, his gene­

rals, magistrates, and senators; and his precarious indulgence communicated
some

rays of their glory to the persons of their wives and children. But, in the
eye of

the law, all Roman citizens were equal, and all subjects of the empire were
citi­

zens of Rome. That inestimable character was degraded to an obsolete and emp­

ty name. The voice of a Roman could no longer enact his laws, or create the

annual ministers of his power; his constitutional rights might have checked
the

arbitrary will of a. master; and the bold adventurer from Germany or Arabia
was

admitted, with equal favour, to the civil and military command, which the
citizen

alone had been once entitled to assume over the conquests of his fathers. The

first Cscsars had scrupulously guarded the distinction of ingenuous and
servile

birth, which was decided by the condition of the mother; and the candour of
the

laws was satisfied, if her freedom could be ascertained during a single moment
be­

tween conception and the delivery. The slaves who were liberated by a generous

master immediately entered into the middle class bf libertines or freedmen:
but

they could never be enfranchised from the duties of obedience and gratitude:

whatever were the fruits of their industry, their patron and his family
inherited

the third part; or even the whole of their fortune, if they died without
children

and without a testament. Justinian respected the rights of patrons; but his
indul­

gence removed the badge of disgrace from the two inferior orders of freedmen:

whoever ceased to be a slave, obtained without reserve or delay, the station
of a

citizen; and at length the dignity of an ingenuous birth, which nature had
refused,

-was created, or supposed by the omnipotence of the emperor. Whatever re­  
straints of age, or forms, or numbers, had been formerly introduced to check
the

abuse of manumissions, and the too rapid increase of vile and indigent Romans,

he finally abolished; and the spirit of his laws promoted the extinction of
domes­

tic servitude. Yet the eastern provinces were filled, in the time of
Justinian, with

multitudes of slaves, either born or purchased for the use of their masters;
and

the price, from ten to seventy pieces of gold, was determined by their age,
their

strength, and their education. (1) But the hardships of this dependant state
were

continually diminished by the influence of government and religion; and the
pride

of a subject was no longer elated by his absolute dominion over the life and
hap­

piness of his bondsman. (2)

The law of nature instructs most animals to cherish and educate their infant

progeny.. The law of reason inculcates to the human species the returns of
that

■piety. But the exclusive, absolute, and perpetual dominion of the father over
his

children, is peculiar to the Roman jurisprudence, (3) and seems to be coeval
with

the foundation of the city. (4) The paternal power was instituted or confirmed
by

Romulus himself; and after the practice of three centuries, it was inscribed
on

the fourth table of the decemvirs. In the forum, the senate, or the camp, the

adult son of a Roman citizen enjoyed the public and private rights of a
fierson:

in his father's house, he was a mere thing; confounded by the laws with the
move­

ables, the cattle, and the slaves, whom the capricious master might alienate
or de­

stroy without being responsible to any earthly tribunal. The hand which be­

stowed the daily sustenance might resume the voluntary gift, and whatever was

acquired by the labour or fortune of the son, was immediately lost in the
property

(1) If the option of a slave was bequeathed to several legatees, they drew
lots, and the losers were entitled

to their share of his value; ten pieces of gold for a common servant or maid
under ten years; if above that are,

twenty; if they knew a trade, thirty; notaries or writers, fifty; midwives or
physicians, sixty; eunuchs under

ten years, thirty pieces; above, fifty; if tradesmen, seventy. (Cod. lib. vi.
tit. xliii. leg. iii.) These legal prices

are generally below those of the market.

(2) For the state of slaves and freedmen, see Institutes, lib. i. tit. 3—8.
lib. ii. tit. ix. lib. iii. tit. viii. 9; Pan­

dects or pigest. lib. i. tit. 5, 6. lib. xxxviii. tit. 1—1. and the whole of
the fortieth book. Code, lib. vi. tit. 4, 5.

■lib. vii. tit. 1—23. Be it henceforward understood that, with the original
text, of the Institutes and Pandects,

the correspondent articles in the Antiquities and Elements of Heineccius are
implicitly ■quoted: and with the

twenty-seven first books of the Pandects, the learned and rational
Commentaries of Gerard Noodt (Opera,

torn. si. p. 1—590. the end. Lugd. Bat. 1724.)

(3) See the patria potesta in the Institutes (lib. i. tit. 9.,) the Pandects
(lib. i. tit. 6,7. J and the Code (lib. viii.

tit. 47—49.) Jus potestatis quod in liberui habemus proprium est civium
Romanorum. Nulli enim alii sunt

homines, qui talem in liberos habeant potestatem qualem nos habemus.

(4) nionysius, Hal. lib. ii. p. 94,9J. Gravioa (Opp. p. 286.) produces the
words of (he twelve tables. Papi-

nian (in Collatione Legum Uoroan. et Mosaicarum, tit. iv. p.204.) styles this
patria potestatis, lex regia: Ulpittn

>d Sabin. lib. xxvi. m Pandect, lib. i. tit. vi. leg. viii.) says, jos
potestatis morihus receptum; and fnriosusfifi-

itnun potestate habebit. How sacred, or rather, how absurd!

