■jus THE DECLINE AND FALL

calmer moments, Nestorius confessed, that it might be tolerated or excused by

the union of the two natures; and the communication of their idioms:{V) but he

was exasperated by contradiction, to disclaim the worship of anew-born, an
infant

Deity, to draw his inadequate similes from the conjugal or civil partnerships
of

life, and to describe the manhood of Christ, as the robe, the instrument, the
ta­

bernacle of his Godhead. At these blasphemous sounds, the pillars of the sanc­

tuary were shaken. The unsuccessful competitors of Nestorius indulged their

pious or personal resentment, the Byzantine clergy was secretly displeased
with

the intrusion of a stranger: whatever is superstitious or absurd, might claim
the

protection of the monks; and the people were interested in the glory of their
vir­

gin patroness.(2) The sermons of the archbishop, and the service of the altar,

were disturbed by seditious clamour; his authority and doctrine were renounced

by separate congregations; every wind scattered round the empire the leaves of

controversy; and the voice of the combatants on a sonorous theatre re-echoed
in

the cells of Palestine and Egypt. It was the duty of Cyril to enlighten the
zeal

and ignorance of his innumerable monks; in tlie school of Alexandria, he had

imbibed and professed the incarnation of one nature: and the successor of
Atha-

nasius consulted his pride and ambition, when he rose in arms against another

Arius, more formidable and more guilty, on the second throne of the hierarchy.

After a short correspondence, in which the rival prelates disguised their
hatred

in the hollow language of respect and charity, the patriarch of Alexandria de­

nounced to the prince and people, to the east and to the west, the damnable
er­

rors of the Byzantine pontiff. From the east, more, especially from Antioch,
he

obtained the ambiguous counsels of toleration and silence, which were
addressed

to both parties while they favoured the cause of Nestorius. But the Vatican
re­

ceived with open arms the messengers of Egypt. The vanity of Celestine was

flattered by the appeal; and the partial version of a monk decided the faith
of

the pope, who, with his Latin clergy, was ignorant of the language, the arts,
and

the theology of the Greeks. At the head of an Italian synod, Celestine weighed

the merits of the cause, approved the creed of Cyril, condemned the sentiments

and person of Nestorius, degraded the heretic from his episcopal dignity,
allowed

a respite of ten days for recantation and penance, and delegated to his enemy
the

execution of this rash and illegal sentence. But the patriarch of Alexandria,

whilst he darted the thunders of a god, exposed the errors and passions of a

mortal; and his twelve(3) anathemas still torture the orthodox slaves, who
adore

the memory of a saint, without forfeiting their allegiance to the synod of
Chalce-

don. These bold assertions are indelibly tinged with the colours of the
Apollina-

rian heresy; but the serious, and perhaps the sincere, professions of
Nestorius,

have satisfied the wiser and less partial theologians of the present times.
(4)

Yet neither the emperor nor the primate of the east were disposed to obey the

mandate of an Italian priest; and a synod of the catholic, or rather of the
Greek

church, was unanimously demanded as the sole remedy that could appease or de­

cide this ecclesiastical quarrel. (5) Ephesus, on all sides accessible by sea
and

land, was chosen for the place, the festival of Pentecost, for the day of the
meet­

ing; a writ of summons was despatched to each metropolitan, and a guard was
sta­

tioned to .protect and confine the fathers, till they should settle the
mysteries of

heaven, and the faith of the earth. Nestorius appeared not as a criminal, but
as

a judge; he depended rather on the weight than the number of his prelates, and

his sturdy slaves from the baths of Zeuxippus were armed for every service of
in­

jury or defence. But his adversary Cyril was more powerful in the weapons both

(1) The «vTi-Wi; of the Greeks, a mutual loan or transfer of the idioms of
properties of each nature to the

other—of infinity to man, possibility to God, Sec. Twelve rules on this nicest
of subjects compose the Theo­

logical Grammar of Petavius. (Dogmata Theolog. torn. T. lib. iv. e. 14,15. p.
209, &c.)

(2) See Ducange,C. P. Christiana, lib. L p. 30,&c.

(3) Concil. torn. iiL p. 043. They have never been directly approved by the
church. (Tillemont, Mem. Ec-

cles. torn. xiv. p. 368—S72.) I almost pity the agony of rage and sophistry
with which Petavius seems to be

agitated in the sixth book of his Dogmata Theologica.

(4) Such as the rational Basnage, (ad torn. i. Variar. Lection. Canisii in
Prefat. c ii. p. 11—23.) and La Croze,

the universal scholar. (Christianisme des Indej, torn. i. p. 16—20. De
I'Ethiope, p. 26. 27. Thesaur. Episr.

p. 176, &c. 283. 285.) His free sentence is confirmed by that of his friends
Jablonski (Thesaur. Epist. torn. i.

p. 193—201.) and Mosheim, (idem, p. 304. Nestoriom crimine carnisse est et mea
sententia;) and three?more

respectable judges wSl not easily be found. Asseman, a learned and modest
slave, can hardly discern (Bibli-

othec. Orient, torn. iv. p. 190—224.) the guilt and error of the Nestorians.

(fi) The origin and progress of the Nestorian controversy till the synod of
Ephesus, may be found in So­

crates, (lib. vii. c 32.) Evacrmi, (lib. i. c. 1,2.) Liberatus,(Brev.c. 1—4.)
the original Acts, (Concil. torn. iii.

p. 551—991. edit. Venise, 1728.) the Annals of Baronius and Fagi, aD<l the
faithful collections of Tillcmoni.

(Mem. Ecclei. torn. xiv. p. 283—377.)

