OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

cence of Justinian was displayed in the superior pomp of his public
spectacles, an

object not less sacred and important in the eyes of the multitude, than the
creed

of Nice or Chalcedon; the expense of his consulship was estimated at two hun­

dred and eighty-eight thousand pieces of gold; twenty lions, and thirty
leopards,

were produced at the same time in the amphitheatre, and a numerous train of

horses, with their rich trappings, was bestowed as an extraordinary gift on
the

victorious charioteers of the circus. While lie indulged the people of
Constanti­

nople, and received the addresses of foreign kings, the nephew of Justin
assidu­

ously cultivated the friendship of the senate. That venerable name seemed to

qualify its members to declare the sense of the nation, and to regulate the
succes­

sion of the imperial throne: the feeble Ana tasius had permitted the vigour of
go­

vernment to degenerate into the form or substance of an aristocracy; and the
mi­

litary officers who had obtained the senatorial rank, were followed by their
do­

mestic guards, a band of veterans, whose arms or acclamations might fix in a
tu­

multuous moment the diadem of the east. The treasures of the state were la­

vished to procure the voices of the senators; sRid their unanimous wish that
he

would be pleased to adopt Justinian for his colleague, was communicated to the

emperor. But this request, which too clearly admonished him of his approaching

end, was unwelcome to the jealous temper of an aged monarch, desirous to
retain

the power which he was incapable of exercising; and Justin, holding his purple

with both his hands, advised them to prefer, since an election was so
profitable,

some older candidate. Notwithstanding this reproach, the senate proceeded to

decorate Justinian with the royal epithet of nobilissimus; and their decree
was ra­

tified by the affection or the fears of his uncle. After some time the languor
of

mind and body, to which he was reduced by an incurable wound in his thigh, in­

dispensably required the aid of a guardian. He summoned the patriarch and se-

. nators; and in their presence solemnly placed the diadem on the head of his
ne­

phew, who was conducted from the palace to the circus, and saluted by the loud

and joyful applause of the people. The life of Justin was prolonged about four

months, but from the instant of this ceremony, he was considered as dead to
the

empire, which acknowledged Justinian, in the forty-fifth year of his age, for
the

lawful sovereign of the east.(l)

From his elevation to his death, Justinian governed the Roman empire thirty-

eight years seven months and thirteen days. The events of his reign, which ex­

cite our curious attention by their number, variety, and importance, are
diligently

related by the secretary of Belisarius, a rhetorician whom eloquence had
promo­

ted to the rank of senator, and prefect of Constantinople. According to the
vi­

cissitudes of courage or servitude, of favour or disgrace, Procopius(2)
successively

composed the history, the panegyric, and the satire, of his own times. The
eight

books of the Persian, Vandalic, and Gothic wars,(3) which are continued in the

five books of Agathias, deserve our esteem as a laborious and successful
imitation

of the Attic, or at least of the Asiatic writers of ancient Greece. His facts
are

collected from the personal experience and free conversation of a soldier, a

statesman, and a traveller; his style continually aspires, and often attains,
to

the merit of strength and elegance; his reflections, more especially in the
speeches

which he too frequently inserts, contain a rich fund of political knowledge;
and

the historian, excited by the generous ambition of pleasing and instructing
pos­

terity, appears to disdain the prejudices of the people, and the flattery of
courts.

The writings of Procopius (4) were read and applauded by his cotempora-

(1) The reign of llie elder Justin may be found In the three Chronicles of
Marcellinns, Victor and JohnMa-

Tala (torn. ii. p. 130—15a.) the last of whom fin spite nf Hody, Prolfgonino.
14. 39. edit. Oxon.) lived soon after

Justinian (Jortin's Remarks, &c. vol. iv. p. 383.) in the F.cclesiaslical
History of Evaprrius flili. iv. c. 1—3. 9.,)

and the Excerpta of Theodonis (Lector No. 37.) and in Cedrenus (p. 362—366.,)
and Zonavas (lib. xiv. p. 58—

61.,) who may pass for an original.

(2) See the characters of Procopius and Agatbias in La Mothe le Vayer (torn.
viii. p. 144—174.,) Vosius (de

Historicis Grsec.is, lib. ii. c. 22.,) and Fabricius (Bibliot. Grace, lib. v.
c. 5. torn. vi. p. 248—278.) Their reli-

Rion, an honourable problem, betrays occasional conformity with a secret
attachment to paganism and phi­

losophy.

(3) In the seven first books, two Persie, two Vandalic, and three Gothic,
Procopius has borrowed from Appian

the divisions of provinces and wars: the eighth book, though it bears the name
of Gothic, is a miscellaneous and

general supplement down to the spring of the year 553, from whence it is
continued by Agathias till 559. (Pagi,

Critica. A. D. 579. No. 5.)

(4) The literary fate of Procopius has been somewhat unlucky, l. His books de
Bello Gothieo, were stolen

by Leonard Aretin, and published. (Fnlginii, 1470; Venet. 1471, apud Janson;
Matlaire, Anna!. Typograptt.

torn. i. edit, posterior, p. 290. 304. 279. 299.) in his own name. (See
Vossius de Hist. LaU lib- iii. c. 5, and the

feeble defence of the Venice Giornale de Letterati, torn. xix. p. 207.) 2. His
works were mutilated by the first

Latin translators, Christopher Persona, (Giomale, torn. xix. p. 340—348.) and
Raphael de Volalena Huet de

Claris. Interpretibus, p. 166.) who did not even consnll the MS. of the
Vatican library, of which Ihey were

prefects. (Aleman.in Pnefat. Anecdote.) 3. The Greek text was not printed till
1607, by Hoesehelius of

Angibiirgh. (Dictionnaire de Bayle, torn. ii. p. 782.) 4. The Paris edition
was imperfectly executed by Claude

