OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 16.3

cruelty, nor his clemency from weakness; and his rigid economy too often
exposed

him to the reproach of avarice. But the rational wishes of an absolute monarch

must tend to the happiness of his people; Maurice was endowed with sense and

courage to promote that happiness, and his administration was directed by the
prin­

ciples and example of Tiberius. The pusillanimity of the Greeks had introduced

so complete a separation between the offices of king and of general, that a
private

soldier who had observed and obtained the purple seldom or never appeared at

the head of his armies. Yet the emperor Maurice enjoyed the glory of re­

storing the Persian monarch to his throne: his lieutenants waged a doubtful
war

against the Avars of the Danube, and he cast an eye of pity, of ineffectual
pity,

t>n the abject and distressful state of his Italian provinces.

From Italy the emperors were incessantly tormented by tales of misery and

demands of succours, which extorted the humiliating confession of their own
weak­

ness. The expiring dignity of Rome was only marked by the freedom and ener­

gy of her complaints. "If you are incapable," she said, "of delivering us from

the swords of the Lombards, save us at least from the calamity of famine." Ti­

berius forgave the reproach, and relieved the distress: a supply of corn was
trans­

ported from Egypt to the Tiber: and the Roman people, invoking the name, not

of Camillus, but of St. Peter, repulsed the barbarians from their walls. But
the

relief was accidental, the danger was perpetual and pressing: and the clergy
and

senate, collecting the remains of their ancient opulence, a sum of three
thousand

pounds of gold, despatched the patrician Pamphronius to lay their gifts and
their

complaints at the foot of the Byzantine throne. The attention of the court,
and

the forces of the east, were diverted by the Persian war; but the justice of
Tiberius

applied the subsidy to the defence of the city: and he dismissed the patrician
with

his best advice, either to bribe the Lombard chiefs, or to purchase the aid of
the

kings of France. Notwithstanding this weak invention, Italy was still
afflicted,

Rome was again besieged, and the suburb of Classe, only three miles from
Raven­

na, was pillaged and occupied by the troops of a single duke of Spoleto.
Maurice

gave audience to a second deputation of priests and senators; the duties and
me­

naces of religion were forcibly urged in the letters of the Roman pontiff; and
his

nuncio, the deacon Gregory, was alike qualified to solicit the powers either
of heaven

or of the earth. The emperor adopted, with stronger effect, the measures of
his pre­

decessor: some formidable* chiefs were persuaded to embrace the friendship of
the

Romans; and one of them, a mild and faithful barbarian, lived and died in the
ser­

vice of the exarch: the passes of the Alps were delivered to the Franks; and
the

pope encouraged them to violate, without scruple, their oaths and engagements

to the misbelievers. Childebert, the great grandson of Clovis, was persuaded
to

invade Italy by the payment of fifty thousand pieces; but as he had viewed
with

delight some Byzantine coin of the weight of one pound of gold, the king of
Aus-

trasia might stipulate, that the gift should be rendered more worthy of his
accept­

ance, by a proper mixture of these respectable medals. The dukes of the Lom­

bards had provoked, by frequent inroads, their powerful neighbours of Gaul. As

soon as they were apprehensive of a just retaliation, they renounced their
feeble

and disorderly independence: the advantages of regal government, union,
secrecy,

and vigour, were unanimously confessed; Autharis, the son of Clepho, had
already

attained the strength and reputation of a warrior. Under the standard of their

new king, the conquerors of Italy withstood three successive invasions, one of

which was led by Childebert himself, the last of the Merovingian race who de­

scended from the Alps. The first expedition was defeated by the jealous
animosi­

ty of the Franks and Alemanni. In the second they were vanquished in a bloody

battle, with more loss and dishonour than they had sustained since the
foundation

of their monarchy. Impatient for revenge, they returned a third time with
accu­

mulated force, and Autharis yielded to the fury of the torrent. The troops and

treasures of the Lombards were distributed in the walled towns between the
Alps

and the Apennine. A nation, less sensible of danger, than of fatigue and
delay,

soon murmured against the folly of their twenty commanders; and the hot
vapours

of an Italian sun infected with disease those tramontane bodies which had
already

suffered the vicissitudes of intemperance and famine. The powers that were in­

adequate to the conquest, were more than sufficient for the desolation of the
coun­

try; nor could the trembling natives distinguish between their enemies and
their

deliverers. If the junction of the Merovingian and imperial forces had been
effect­

ed in the neighbourhood of Milan, perhaps they might have subverted the throne

ef the Lombards; but the Franks expected six days the signal of a flaming
village,

