184 THE DECLINE AND FALL

their antagonists, and Germanus himself was hurried along by the crowds, who

rushed to the palace of Hebdomon, seven miles from the city, to adore the ma­

jesty of Phocas the centurion. A modest wish of resigning the purple to the
rank

and merit of Germanus was opposed by his resolution, more obstinate and
equally

sincere:,the senate and clergy obeyed his summons, and as soon as the
patriarch

was assured of his orthodox belief, he consecrated the successful usurper in
the

church of St. John the Baptist. On the third day, amidst the acclamations of a

thoughtless people, Phocas made his public entry in a chariot drawn by four
white

horses; the revolt of the troops was rewarded by a lavish donative, and the
new

sovereign, after visiting the palace, beheld from his throne the games of the
hip­

podrome. In a dispute of precedency between the two factions, his partial
judg­

ment inclined in favour of the greens. Remember that Maurice is still alive,
re­

sounded from the opposite side; and the indiscreet clamour of the blues
admonished

and stimulated the cruelty of the tyrant. The ministers of death were des­

patched to Chalcedon: they dragged the emperor from his sanctuary; and the

live sons of Maurice were successively murdered before the eyes of their
agonizing

parent. At each stroke, which he felt in his heart, he found strength to
rehearse

a pious ejaculation,—Thou art just, O 'Lord.' and thy judgments are righteous.

And such, in the last moments, was his rigid attachment to truth and justice,
that

he revealed to the soldiers the pious falsehood of a nurse who presented her
own

child in the place of a royal infant. (1) .The tragic scene was finally closed
by the

execution of the emperor himself, in the twentieth year of his reign, and the
sixty-

third year of his age. The bodies of the father and his five sons were cast
into

the sea, their heads were exposed at Constantinople to the insults or pity of
the

multitude, and it was not till some signs of putrefaction had appeared, that
Pho­

cas connived at the private burial of these venerable remains. In that grave,
the

faults and errors of Maurice were kindly interred. His fate alone was remem­

bered; and at the end of twenty years, in the recital of the history of
Theophylact,

the mournful tale was interrupted by the tears of the audience. (2)

Such tears must have flowed in secret; and such compassion would have been

criminal, under the reign of Phocas, who was peaceably acknowledged in the

provinces of the east and west. The images of the emperor and his wife Leontia

were exposed in the Lateran to the veneration of the clergy and senate of
Rome,

and afterwards deposited in the palace of the Csesars, between those of
Constan-

tine and Theodosius. As a subject and a Christian, it was the duty of Gregory
to

acquiesce in the established government, but the joyful applause with which he

salutes the fortune of the assassin, has sullied with indelible disgrace the
charac­

ter of the saint. The successor of the apostles might have inculcated with de­

cent firmness the guilt of blood, and the necessity of repentance; he is
content to

celebrate the deliverance of the people and the fall of the oppressor; to
rejoice

that the piety and benignity of Phocas have been raised by Providence to the
im­

perial throne; to pray that his hands may be strengthened against all his
enemies;

and to express a wish, perhaps a prophecy, that after a long and triumphant
reign,

he maybe transferred from a temporal to an everlasting kingdom. (3) I have

already traced the steps of a revolution so pleasing, in Gregory's opinion,
both to

heaven and earth; and Phocas does not appear less hateful in the exercise than

in the acquisition of power. The pencil of an impartial historian has
delineated

the portrait of a monster;(4) his diminutive and deformed person, the
closeness

of his shaggy eve-brows, his red hair, his beardless chin, and his cheek
disfigured

and discoloured by a formidable scar. Ignorant of letters, of laws, and even
of

arms, he indulged in the supreme rank a more ample privilege of lust and
drunk­

enness, and his brutal pleasures were either injurious to his subjects or
disgraceful

(1) From this generous attempt, Corneille has deduced the intricate web of his
tragedy of Heraclius, which

requires more than one representation to be clearly understood; (Corneille de
Voltaire, torn. v. p. 300.) and

which, after an interval of some years, is said to have puzzled the author
himself. Anecdotes Dramatiqucs,

torn. i. p. 422.

(2) The revolt of Phocas and death of Maurice are told by Theophylact
Simocatta, lib. viii. e. 7—12.) the

Paschal Chronicle (p. 379,380.) Theophanes, (Chronograph, p. 238—244.)
Zonaras, torn. ii. lib. i*iv. p. 77—80.)

and Cedrenus, (p. 399—404.)

(3) Gregor. hbvxi. epist. 38. indict. 6. Benignitatem, vestras pietatis ad
imperiale fastigium pervennisse

gaudemus. Lauentur cosli et exultet terra, et de vestris benignis actibus
universal reipublicse populus none

usque vehementer afilictus liilarescat, Sec. This base flattery, the topic of
Protestant invective, is justly cen­

sured by the philosopher Bayle. (Dictionaire Critique, Gregoire I. No. H.
torn. ii. p. 597, J98.) Cardinal Ba-

ronius justifies the pope at the expense of toe fallen emperor.

(4) The images of Phocas were destroyed; but even the malice of his enemies
would suffer one copy of

such a portrait or caricature (Cedrenus, p. 404.) to escape the flames.

4

