OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

&uttered, in the words of Daniel,—"The abomination of desolation i3 in the
holy

place. "(1) At the hour of prayer they stood together in the church of the
resur­

rection; but the caliph refused to perform his devotions, and contented
himself

with praying on the steps of the church of Constantine. To the patriarch he
dis­

closed his prudent and honourable motive. "Had I yielded," said Omar, "to

your request, the Moslems of a future age would have infringed the treaty,
under

colour of imitating my example." By his command the ground of the temple of

Solomon was prepared for the foundation of a mosch;(2) and, during a residence
of

ten days, he regulated the present and future state of his Syrian conquests.
Me­

dina might be jealous, lest the caliph should be detained by the sanctity of
Jerusa­

lem or the beauty of Damascus; her apprehensions were dispelled by his prompt

and voluntary return to the tomb of the apostle. (3)

To achieve what yet remained of the Syrian war, the caliph had formed two

separate armies; a chosen detachment, under Amrou and Vczid, was left in the

camp of Palestine; while the larger division, under the standard of Abu
Obeidah

and fcaled, marched away to the north against Antioch and Aleppo. The latter

of these, the Berxa of the Greeks, was not yet illustrious as the capital of a
pro­

vince or a kingdom; and the inhabitants, by anticipating their submission, and

pleading their povertv, obtained a moderate composition for their lives and
reli­

gion. But the castle of Aleppo,(4) distinct from the city, stood erect on a
lofty

artificial mound: the sides were sharpened to a precipice, and faced with
free­

stone ; and the breadth pf the ditch might be filled with water from the
neighbouring

springs. After the loss of three thousand men, the garrison was still equal to
the

defence; and Youkinna, their valiant and hereditary chief, had murdered his
bro­

ther, a holy monk, for daring to pronounce the name of peace. In a siege of
four

or five months, the hardest of the Syrian war, great numbers of the Saracens

were killed and wounded: their removal to the distance of a mile could not
seduce

the vigilance of Youkinna: nor could the Christians be terrified by the
execution

of three hundred captives, whom they beheaded before the c'astle wall. The si­

lence, and at length the complaints, of Abii Obeidah informed the caliph, that

their hope and patience were consumed arthe foot of this impregnable fortress.

" 1 am variously affected," replied Omar, "by the difference of your success;
but

I charge you by no means to raise the siege of the castle. Your retreat would
di­

minish the reputation of our arms, and encourage the infidels to fall upon you
on

all sides. Remain before Aleppo till God shall determine the event, and forage

with your horse round the adjacent country." The exhortation of the commander

of the faithful was fortified by a supply of volunteers from all the tribes of
Arabia,

who arrived in the camp on horses or camels. Among these was Dames, of a.

servile birth, but of gigantic size, and intrepid resolution. The forty-
seventh day

of his service, he proposed, with only thirty men, to make an attempt on the
cas­

tle. The experience and testimony of Caled recommended his offer; and Abu

Obeidah admonished his brethren not to despise the baser origin of Dames,
since

he himself, could he relinquish the publie care, would cheerfully serve under
the

banner of the slave. His design was covered by the appearance of a retreat;
and

the camp of the Saracens was pitched about a league from Aleppo. The thirty

adventurers lay in ambush at the foot of the hill; and Dames at length
succeeded

in his inquiries, though he was provoked by the ignorance of his Greek
captives.

"God curse these dogs," said the illiterate Arab, "what a strange barbarous

language they speak!" At the darkest hour of the night he scaled the most ac­

cessible height, which he had diligently surveyed, a place where the stones
were

less entire, or the slope less perpendicular, or the guard less vigilant Seven
of

the stoutest Saracens mounted on each other's shoulders, and the weight of the

(1) To &Se\vy/Mt rfc tftuisiriv; to ptiiv Si* AxiwtK reu iti?$>:t5'j iot«? tv
■vvxaxytw Theophan. Chronograpb.

p. 281. This prediction, which had already served for Antiochus and the
Roman's, was again refitted for the

■present nceasion, by the economy of Sophrnnius, one of the deepest
theologians of the Monothelite controversy.

(2) According to the accurate survey of d'Anville (Dissertation sur I'ancienne
Jerusalem, p. 42—J4.,) the

mosch of Omar, enlarged and embellished by succeeding caliphs, covered the
ground of the ancient temple

(;TttXjeiov Tsu uiyxkau vaou JWiJov, says Phocas.) a length of two hundred and
fifteen, a breadth of one hundred

and seventy-two, loises. The Nubian geographer declares, that this magnificent
structure was second only in

size and beauty to the great mosch of Cordova (p. 113,) whose present state
Mr. Swiburne has so elegantly re­

presented (Travels into Spain, p. 29G—302.)

(3) Of the many Arabic tarikhs or chronicles of Jerusalem (d'Herbelot, p.
867.,) Ockley found one among the

Pococks MSS. of Oxford (vol. i. p. 257.,) which he has used to supply the
defective narrative of Al Wakidi.

(4) The Persian historian of Timur (torn. iii. lib. S. c. ixi. p.
300)describes the castle of Aleppo at founded

•on a rock one hundred cubits in height; a proof, says the French translator,
that he had never visited the place.

It is now in the midst of the city, of no strengtb, with a single gate: the
circuit is about five or six hundred

paces, and she ditch half full of stagnant water (Voyages de Tavernier, torn.
i. p. 149, Pocock, vol. ii. part. 1. y.

l so.) The fortresses of theeast are contemptible to a European eye.

