OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

Obeidah. At the hour of midnight, one hundred chosen deputies of the clergy

and people were introduced to the tent of that venerable commander. He re­

ceived and dismissed them with courtesy. They returned with a written
agreement,

on the faith of a companion of Mahomet, that all hostilities should cease;
that the

voluntary emigrants might depart in safety, with as much as they could carry

away of their effects; and that the tributary subjects of the caliph should
en­

joy their lands and houses, with the use and possession of seven churches. On

these terms, the most respectable hostages, and the gate nearest to his camp,

were delivered into his hands: his soldiers imitated the moderation of their
chief;

and he enjoyed the submissive gratitude of a people whom he had rescued

from destruction. But the success of the treaty had relaxed their vigilance,
and

in the same moment the opposite quarter of the city was betrayed and taken by

assault. A party of a hundred Arabs had opened the eastern gate to a more in­

exorable foe. "No quarter," cried the rapacious and sanguinary Caled, "no

quarter to the enemies of the Lord." His trumpets sounded, and a torrent of

Christian blood was poured down the streets of Damascus. When he reached the

church of St. Mary, he was astonished and provoked by the peaceful aspect of
his

companions; their swords were in the scabbard, and they were surrounded by a

multitude of priests and monks.—Abu Obeidah saluted the general; " God," said

he, " has delivered the city into my hands by way of surrender, and lias saved
the

believers the trouble of fighting."—"And am I not," replied the indignant
Caled,

" am I not the lieutenant of the commander of the faithful? Have I not taken
the

city by storm? The unbelievers shall perish by the sword. Fall on." The hungry

and cruel Arabs would have obeyed the welcome command; and Damascus was

lost, if the benevolence of Abu Obeidah had not been supported by a decent and

dignified firmness. Throwing himself between the trembling citizens and the
most

eager of the barbarians, he abjured them by the holy name of God, to respect
his

promise, to suspend their fury, and to wait the determination of their chiefs.
The

chiefs retired into the church of St. Mary; and after a vehement debate, Caled

submitted in some measure to the reason and authority of his colleague, who
urged

the sanctity of a covenant, the advantage as well as the honour which the
Moslems

would derive from the punctual performance of their word, and the obstinate
re­

sistance which thev must encounter from the distrust and despair of the rest
of

the Syrian cities. It was agreed that the sword should be sheathed; that the
part

of Damascus which had surrendered to Abu Obeidah, should be immediately en­

titled to the benefit of his capitulation; and that the final decision should
be referred

to the justice and wisdom of the caliph. (1) A large majority of the people
accepted

the terms of toleration and tribute; and Damascus is still peopled by twenty
thou­

sand Christians. But the valiant Thomas, and the free-born patriots who had

fought under his banner, embraced the alternative of poverty and exile. In the

adjacent meadow, a numerous encampment was formed of priests and laymen, of

soldiers and citizens, of women and children: they collected, with haste and
terror,

their most precious moveables; and abandoned with loud lamentations or silent

anguish, their native homes, and the pleasant banks of the Pharphar. The in­

flexible soul of Caled was not touched by the spectacle of their distress; he
dis­

puted with the Damascenes the property of a magazine of corn; endeavoured to

exclude the garrison from the benefit of the treaty; consented, with
reluctance,

that each of the fugitives should arm himself with a sword, or a lance, or a
bow;

and sternly declared, that, after a respite of three days, they might be
pursued

and treated as the enemies of the Moslems.

The passion of a Syrian youth completed the ruin of the exiles of Damascus.

A nobleman of the city, of the name of Jonas,(2) was betrothed to a wealthy
maiden;

but her parents delayed the consummation of his nuptials, and their daughter
was

persuaded to escape with the man whom she had chosen. They corrupted the

nightly watchmen of the gate Keisan: the lover, who led the way, was encom­

passed by a squadron of Arabs; but his exclamation in the Greek tongue,— The

(1) It appears from Abulft-da (p. 125.) and Elmacin,(p. 32.J that this
diitinction of the two parts of Damascus

was long remembered, though not always respected, by the Mahometan sovereigns.
See likewise Eutychitis.

(Annal. torn. ii. p. 379,380.383.)

(2) On the fate of these lovers, whom he names Phocyas and Eudocia, Mr. Hughes
lias built the siege of Da­

mascus, one of our most popular tragedies, and which possesses the rare merit
of blending nature and history.

t,e manners of the times and the feelings of the heart. The foolish delicacy
of the players compelled bim to

soften the guilt of the hero and the despair of the heroine. Instead of a base
renegado, Phocyas serves the

Arabs as an honourable ally; instead of prompting their pursuit, he flies to
the succour of his countrymen, and,

after killing Calad and Derav, is himself mortally wounded, and expires in the
presence of Eudocia, who pro­

fesses her resolution to take the veil at Constantinople. A frigid
catmtrophe.'

