OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 301

v distress, was granted as the price of a doubtful vote or a voluntary
service;

vhatever had been granted to one, could not, without injury, be denied to his
suc-

;essor or equal; and every act of local or temporary possession was insensibly

noulded into the constitution of the Germanic kingdom. In every province, the

risible presence of the duke or count was interposed between the throne and
the

lobles; the subjects of the law became the vassals of a private chief; and the
stand­

ard, which he received from his sovereign, was often raised against him in the

field. The temporal power of the clergy was cherished and exalted by the
super­

stition or policy of the Carlovingian and Saxon dynasties, who blindly
depended on

their moderation and fidelity; and the bishoprics of Germany were made equal
in

extent and privilege, superior in wealth and population, to the most ample
states

of the military order. As long as the emperors retained the prerogative of be­

stowing on every vacancy these ecclesiastic and secular benefices, their cause
was

maintained by the gratitude or ambition of their friends and favourites. But
in

the quarrel of the investitures, they were deprived of their influence over
the epis­

copal chapters; the freedom of election was restored, and the sovereign was
re­

duced, by a solemn mockery, to his first prayers, the recommendation, once in

his reign, to a single prebend in each church. The secular governors, instead
of

being recalled at the will of a superior, could be degraded only by the
sentence of

their peers. In the first age of the monarchy, the appointment of the son to
the

duchy or county of his father, was solicited as a favour; it was gradually
obtained

as a custom, and extorted as a right: the lineal succession was often extended
to

the collateral or female branches; the states of the empire (their popular,
and at „

length their legal appellation) were divided and alienated by testament and
sale;

and all idea of a public trust was lost in that of a private and perpetual
inheritance.

The emperor could not even be enriched by the casualties of forfeiture and ex­

tinction: within the term of a year, he was obliged to dispose of the vacant
fief, and

in the choice of the candidate, it was his duty to consult either the general
or the

provincial diet.

After the death of Frederic II. Germany was left a monster with a hundred

heads. A crowd of princes and prelates disputed the ruins of the empire; the

lords of the innumerable castles were less prone to obey, than to imitate,
their su­

periors; and according to the measure of their strength, their incessant
hostilities

received the names of conquest or robbery. Such anarchy was the inevitable
con­

sequence of the laws and manners of Europe; and the kingdoms of France and

Italy were shivered into fragments by the violence of the same tempest. But
the

Italian cities and the French vassals were divided and destroyed, while the
union

of the Germans had produced, under the name of an empire, a great system of a

federative republic. In the frequent, and at lastthe perpetual, institution of
diets,

a national spirit was kept alive, and the powers of a common legislature are
still

exercised by the three branches or colleges of the electors, the princes, and
the

free and imperial cities of Germany. I. Seven of the most powerful feudatories

were permitted to assume, with a distinguished name and rank, the exclusive
pri­

vilege of choosing the Roman emperor; and these electors were the king of Bo­

hemia, the duke of Saxony, the margrave of Brandenburg, the count palatine of

the Rhine, and the three archbishops of Mentz, of Treves, and of Cologne. II.

The college of princes and prelates purged themselves of a promiscuous
multitude:

they reduced to four representative votes, the long series of independent
counts,

and excluded the nobles or equestrian order; sixtv thousand of whom, as in the

Polish diets, had appeared on horseback in the field of election. III. The
pride

of birth and dominion, of the sword and the mitre, wisely adopted the commons

as the third branch of the legislature, and, in the progress of society, they
were

introduced about the same era into the national assemblies of France, England,

and Germany. The Hanseatic league commanded the trade and navigation of

the north: the confederates of the Rhine secured the peace and intercourse of
the

inland country: the influence of the cities has been adequate to their wealth
and

policy, and their negative still invalidates the acts of the two superior
colleges of

■electors and princes. (1)

(1) In the immense labyrinth of the jut puiiUram of Germany, T must either
quote one writer or a thou­

sand; and I had rather trust to one faithful guide, than transcribe, on
credit, a multitude of names and pas­

sages. That guide is M. Pfeffel, the author of the best legal and
constitutional history that I know of any

'country. (NouTel Abrege Chronologique de I'Histoire et du Droit Public
d'Atlemagne, Paris, 1770, 2 vols, in

4to.) His learning and j udgment have discerned the most interesting facts:
his simple brevity comprises them

m a narrow space; his chronological order distributes thera under the proper
dates; and an elnborate index;

