THE DECLINE AND FALL

a tomb, a temple, a city, arose near the ruins of Cufa.(l) Many thousands of
the

Schiites repose in holy ground at the feet of the vicar of God; and the desert
is

vivified by the numerous and annual visits of the Persians, who esteem their
devo­

tion not less meritorious than the pilgrimage to Mecca.

The persecutors of Mahomet usurped the inheritance of his children; and the

champions of idolatry became the supreme heads of his religion and empire. The

opposition of Abu Sophian had been fierce and obstinate; his conversion was
tar­

dy and reluctant; his new faith was fortified by necessity and interest; he
served,

he fought, perhaps he believed; and the sins of the time of ignorance were
expia­

ted by the recent merits of the family of Ommiyah. Moawiyah, the son of Abu

Sophian, and of the cruel Henda, was dignified in his early youth with the
title or

office of secretary of the prophet; the judgment of Omar intrusted him with
the

government of Syria; and he administered that important province above forty

years, either in a subordinate or supreme rank. Without renouncing the fame of

valour and liberality, he affected the reputation of humanity and moderation;
a

grateful people was attached to their benefactor, and the victorious Moslems
were

enriched with the spoils of Cyprus and Rhodes. The sacred duty of pursuing the

assassins of Othman was the engine and pretence of his ambition. The bloody

shirt of the martyr was exposed in the mosch of Damascus: the emir deplored
the

fate of his injured kinsman; and sixty thousand Syrians were engaged in his
service

by an oath of fidelity and revenge. Amrou, the conqueror of Egypt, himself and

army, was the first who saluted the new monarch, and divulged the dangerous
se­

cret, that the Arabian caliphs might be created elsewhere more than in the
city

of the prophet. (2) The policy of Moawiyah eluded the valour of his rival;
and,

after the death of Ali, he negotiated the abdication of his son Hassan, whose
mind

was either above or below the government of the world, and who retired without

a sigh from the palace of Cufa, to an humble cell near the tomb of his
grandfather.

The aspiring wishes of the caliph were finally crowned by the important change

of an elective to an hereditary kingdom. Some murmurs of freedom or fanaticism

attested the reluctance of the Arabs, and four citizens of Medina refused the
oath

of fidelity; but the designs of Moawiyah were conducted with vigour and
address;

and his son Yezid, a feeble and dissolute youth, was proclaimed as the comman­

der of the faithful, and the successor of the apostle of God.

A familiar story is related of the benevolence of one of the sons of Ali. In

serving at table, a slave had inadvertently dropped a dish of scalding broth
on his

master: the heedless wretch fell prostrate, to deprecate his punishment, and
re­

peated a verse of the Koran. " Paradise is for those who command their anger.

—I am not angry.—And for those who pardon offences. —I pardon your offence.—

And for those who return good for evil—I give you your liberty, and four hun­

dred pieces of silver." With an equal measure of piety, Hosein, the younger

brother of Hassan, inherited a remnant of his father's spirit, and served with
ho­

nour against the Christians in the siege of Constantinople. The primogeniture
of

the line of Hashem, and the holy character of grandson of the apostle, had
cen­

tred in his person, and he was at liberty to prosecute his claim against
Yezid, the

tyrant of Damascus, whose vices he despisei and whose title he had never
deigned

to acknowledge. A list was secretly transmitted from Cufa to Medina, of one

hundred and forty thousand Moslems, who professed their attachment to his
cause,

and who were eager to draw their swords as soon as he should appear on the

banks of the Euphrates. Against the advice of his wisest friends, he resolved
to

trust his person and family in the hands of a perfidious people. He traversed
the

desert of Arabia with a timorous retinue of women and children; but as he ap­

proached the confines of Irak, he was alarmed by the solitary or hostile face
of

the country, and suspected either the defection or ruin of his party. His
fears

were just: Obeidollah, the governor of Cufa, had extinguished the first sparks
of

an insurrection; and Hosein, in the plain of Kerbela, was encompassed by a
body

of five thousand horse, who intercepted his communication with the city and
the

river. He might still have escaped to a fortress in the desert, that had
defied the

power of Cicsar and Chosroes, and confided in the fidelity of the tribe of
Tai,

which would have armed ten thousand warriors in his defence. In a conference

(1) The city of Meshed Ali, five or sis miles from llie ruins of Cufa, and one
hundred and twenty to the south

of Bagdad, isof thesizeand form of the modern Jerusalem. Meshed Hosein, larger
and more populous, is at

the distance of thirty miles.

(2) I borrow, on this occasion, the strong sense and expression of Tacitus,
(Hist. i. 4.) Evnlgato imperii ar-

eano posse imperatorem alibi rjuam Roma1 fieri.

