CS-1- THE DECLINE AND FALL

two princes and the archbishop of Toledo occupied the most important post:
their

well-timed defection broke the ranks of the Christians; each warrior was
prompt­

ed by fear or suspicion to consult his personal safety; and the remains of the
Goth­

ic army was scattered or destroyed in the flight and pursuit of the three
following

days. Amidst the general disorder, Roderic started from his car, and mounted

Orelia, the fleetest of his horses; but he escaped from a soldier's death to
perish

more ignobly in the waters of the Bcetis or Guadalquivir. His diadem, his
robes,

and his courser, were found on the bank; but as the body of the Gothic prince
was

lost in the waves, the pride and ignorance of the caliph must have been
gratified

with some meaner head, which was exposed in triumph before the palace of Da­

mascus. "And such," continues a valiant historian of the Arabs, **is the fate
of

those kings who withdraw themselves from a field of battle. "(1)

Count Julian had plunged so deep into guilt and infamy, that his only hope was

in the ruin of his country. After the battle of Xeres he recommended the most

effectual measures to the victorious Saracens. "The king of the Goths is
slain;

their princes are fled before you, the army is routed, the nation is
astonished. Se­

cure with sufficient detachments the cities of Boetica; but in person, and
without

delay, march to the royal city of Toledo, and allow not the distracted
Christians

either time or tranquillity for the election of a new monarch." Tarik listened
to

his advice. A Roman captive and proselyte, who had been enfranchised by the

caliph himself, assaulted*Cordova with seven hundred horse; he swam the river,

surprised the town, and drove the Christians into the great church, where they

defended themselves above three months. Another detachment reduced the sea

coast of Boetica, which in the last period of the Moorish power, has comprised
in

a narrow space the populous kingdom of Grenada. The march of Tarik from

the Boetus to the Tagus,(2) was directed through the Sierra Morena, that sepa­

rates Andalusia and Castille, till he appeared in arms under the walls of
Tole-

do.(3) The most zealous of the catholics had escaped with the relics of their

saints; and if the gates were shut, it was only till the victor had subscribed
a fair

and reasonable capitulation. The voluntary exiles were allowed to depart with

their effects; seven churches were appropriated to the Christian worship; the

archbishop and his clergy were at liberty to exercise their functions, the
monks

to practise or neglect their penance; and the Goths and Romans were left in
all

civil and criminal cases to the subordinate jurisdiction of their own laws and
ma­

gistrates. But the justice of Tarik protected the Christians, his gratitude
and

policy rewarded the Jews, to whose secret or open aid he was indebted for his

most important acquisitions. Persecuted by the kings and synods of Spain, who

had often passed the alternative of banishment or baptism, that outcast nation

embraced the moment of revenge; the comparison of their past and present state

was the pledge of their fidelity; and the alliance between the disciples of,
Moses

and of Mahomet was maintained till the final era of their common expulsion.

From the royal seat of Toledo, the Arabian leader spread his conquests to the

north, over the modern realms of Castille and Leon; but it is needless to
enume­

rate the cities that yielded on his approach, or again to describe the table
of eme­

rald,^) transported from the east by the Romans, acquired by the Goths among

the spoils of Rome, and presented by the Arabs to the throne of Damascus. Be­

yond the Asturian mountains, the maritime town of Gijon was the term(5) of the

lieutenant of Musa, who had performed, with the speed of a traveller, his
victo-

(1) Id sane infortunii regibus pedem ex acie referentibus sape contingit. Ben
Hazil of Grenada, in BibHot.

Arabicc-Hispana, torn. ii. p. 327. Some credulous Spaniards believe that king
Roderic, or Roderigo, escaped

to a hermit's cell, and others that he was cast alive into a tub full of
serpents, from whence he exclaimed with

a lamentable voice, u They devour the part with which I have so grievously
sinned." (Don Quixote, part 2.

lib. iii. c. 1.)

(2) The direct road from Corduba to Toledo was measured by Mr. Swinburne's
roules in seventy-two hours

and a half; but a larger computation must lie adopted for the slow and devious
march of an army. The Arabs

traversed the province of La Mancha, which the pen of Cervantes has
transformed into classic ground to the

reader of every nation.

(3) The antiquities of Toledo, t/ro* Parua in the Punic wars, Urbs Regia in
the sixth century, are briefly

described by Nonius. (Hispania, c. 59. p. 181—186.) He borrows from Roderic
the fatalepatatium of Moorish

portraits; but modestly insinuates that it was no more than a Roman
amphitheatre.

(4) In the Historia Arabum (c. o. p. 17. ad calcem Elmacin,) Roderic of Toledo
describes the emerald tobies,

and inserts the name of Medinat Almeyda in Arabic words and letters. He
appears to be conversant with the

Mahometan writers; but I cannot agree with M. de Guignes, (Hist, des Huns,
torn. i. p. 350.) that he had read

and transcribed Novairi; because he was dead a hundred years before Novairi
composed his history. This mis­

take is founded on a still grosser error. M. de Guides confounds the historian
Roderic Ximenes, archbishop

of Toledo, in the thirteenth century, with cardinal Ximenes, who governed
Spain in the beginning of the six­

teenth, and was the subject, not the author, of historical compositions.

. (5) Tarik might have inscribed on the last rock, the boast of Eegnard and
his companion in their Lapland

journey,» Hlc tandem stetimus, nobis ubi defuit oi bis."

