OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. rs

t» the banners of the Turks, preserved the memory, or rather suggested the
idea,

of a fable, which was invented, without any mutual intercourse, by the
shepherds

of Latium and those of Scy thia. At the equal distance of two thousand miles
from

the Caspian, the Icy, the Chinese, and the Bengal seas, a ridge of mountains
is

conspicuous, the centre, and perhaps the summit, of Asia; which, in the
language

of different nations, has been styled Imaus, and Caf,(l) and Altai, and the
Golden

Mountains, and the Girdle of the Earth. The sides of the hills were productive

of minerals; and the iron forges, (2) for the purpose of war, were exercised
by the

Turks, the most despised portion of the slaves of the great khan of the
Geougen.

But their servitude could only last till a leader, bold and eloquent, should
arise, to

persuade his countrymen, that the same arms, which they forged for their mas­

ters, might become, in their own hands, the instruments of freedom and
victory.

They sallied from the mountain;(3) a sceptre was the reward of his advice; and

the annual ceremony, in which a piece of iron was heated in the fire, and a
smith's

hammer was successively handled by the prince and his nobles, recorded for
ages

the humble profession and rational pride of the Turkish nation. Bertezena,
their

first leader, signalized their valour and his own in successful combats
against the

neighbouring tribes; but when he presumed to ask in marriage the daughter of
the

great khan, the insolent demand of a slave and a mechanic was contemptuously
re­

jected. The disgrace was expiated by a more noble alliance with the princess
of

China; and the decisive battle, which almost extirpated the nation of the
GeougeD,

established in Tartary the new and more powerful empire of the Turks. They

reigned over the north; but they confessed the vanity of conquest, by their
faithful

attachment to the mountain of their fathers. The royal encampment seldom lost

sight of mount Altai, from whence the river Irtish descends to water the rich
pas­

tures of the Calmucks,(4) which nourish the largest sheep and oxen in the
world.

The soil is fruitful, and the climate mild and temperate: the happy region was
igno­

rant of earthquake and pestilence; the emperor's throne was turned towards the
east,

and a golden wolf, on the top of a spear, seemed to guard the entrance of his
tent.

One of the successors of Bertezena was tempted by the luxury and superstition
of

China; but his design of building cities and temples was defeated by the
simple

■wisdom of a barbarian counsellor. '1 The Turks," he said,'' are not equal in
num­

ber to one-hundreth part of the inhabitants of China. If we balahce their
power,

and elude their armies, it is because we wander without any fixed habitations,
in

the exercise of war and hunting. Are we strong? we advance and conquer: are

we feeble? we retire and are concealed. Should the Turks confine themselves

within the walls of the cities, the loss of a- battle would be the destruction
of their

empire. The Bonzes preach only patience, humility, and the renunciation of the

world. Such, O king! is not the religion of heroes." They entertained with
less

reluctance the doctrines of Zoroaster; but the greatest part of the nation
acquiesced,

without inquiry, in the opinions, or rather in the practice, of their
ancestors. The

honours of sacrifice were reserved for the supreme Deitv; they acknowledged,
in

rude hymns, their obligations to the air, the fire, the water, and the earth;
and their

priests derived some profit from the art of divination. Their unwritten laws
were

vigorous and impartial: theft was punished by a tenfold restitution; adultery,
trea­

son, and murder, with death: and no chastisement could be inflicted too severe
for

the rare and inexpiable guilt of cowardice. As the subject nations marched un­

der the standard of the Turks, their cavalry, both men and horses, were
proudly

computed by millions; one of their effective armies consisted of four hundred
thou­

sand soldiers, and in less than fifty years they were connected in peace and
war

with the Romans, the Persians, and the Chinese. In their northern limits, some

(1) From Caf to Caf; which a more rational geography would interpret from
Imaus, perhaps to mount At-

1*1. According to the religious philosophy of the Mahometans, the basis of
mount Caf is an emerald, whose

reflection produces the azure of the sky. The mountain is endowed with a
sensitive action in its roots or

nerves: and their vibration, at the command of God, is the cause of
earthquakes (D'Herbelot, p. 230,231.)

(2) The Siberian iron is the best and most plentiful in the world: and in (he
southern parts, above sixty

mines are now worked by the industry of the Russians (Strahlenberg, Hist, of
Siberia, p. 342. 387. Voyage en

liberie, par l'Abbe Chappe cTAuteroche, p. 603.608. edit, in 12mo. Amsterdam,
1770.) The Turks offered iron

for sale; yet the Roman ambassadors, with strange obstinacy, persisted in
believing that it was all a trick, and

that their country produced none (Menander in Excerpt. Leg. p. Ifi2.)

(3) Of Irgana-kon (Abulgbazi Khan, Hist. Genealogique des Tartars, P. 2. c. 5.
p. 71—77. c. IS. p. 1»5.)

The tradition of the Moguls, of the four hundred and fifty years which they
passed in the mountains, agree*

with the Chinese periods of the history of the Huns and Turks (De Guigncs,
torn. i. part 2. p. 376,) and the

twenty generations, from the restoration to Zingis.

(4) The country of the Turks, now of the Catmucks, is well described in the
Genealogical History, p. $21—

*»2. The curious notes of the Freuoh translator are enlarged and digested in the second volume of the Eng­  
lish version.

