TriE DECLINE AND FALL

■was subject, as his own* to the sceptre of Charlemagne. The people swore
alie^

giance to his person and family: in his name money was coined, and justice was

administered; and the election of the popes was examined and confirmed by his
au­

thority. Except an original and self-inherent claim of sovereignty, there was
not

any prerogative remaining, which the title of emperor could add to the
patrician of

Rome.(l)

The gratitude of the Carlovingians was adequate to these obligations, and
their

names are consecrated as the saviours and benefactors of the Roman church. Her

ancient patrimony of farms and houses was transformed by their bounty into the

temporal dominion of cities and provinces; and the donation of the exarchate
was

the first-fruits of the conquest of Pepin. (2) Astolphus with a sigh
relinquished

his prey; the keys and the hostages of the principal cities were delivered to
the

French ambassador; and, in his master's name, he presented them before the

tomb of St. Peter. The ample measure of the exarchate(S) might comprise all

the provinces of Italy which had obeyed the emperor and his vicegerent; but
its

strict and proper limits were included in the territories of Ravenna, Bologna,
and

Ferrara; its inseparable dependency was the Pentapolis, which stretched along
the

Hadriatic from Rimini to Ancona, and advanced into the midland country as far
as

the ridges of the Appennine. In this transaction, the ambition and avarice of
the

, popes had been severely condemned. Perhaps the humility of a Christian
priest

should have rejected an earthly kingdom, which it was not easy for him to
govern

without renouncing the virtues of his profession. Perhaps a faithful subject,
or a

generous enemy, would have been less impatient to divide the spoils of the
bar­

barian; and if the emperor had intrusted Stephen to solicit in his name the
resti­

tution of the exarchate, I will not absolve the pope from the reproach of
treachery

and falsehood. But in the rigid interpretation of the laws, every one may
accept,

without injury, whatever his benefactor can bestow without injustice. The
Greek

emperor had abdicated or forfeited his right to the exarchate; and the sword
of

Astolphus was broken by the stronger sword of the Carlovingian. It was'not in
the

cause of the Iconoclast that Pepin had exposed his person and army in a double

expedition beyond the Alps; he possessed, and might lawfully alienate, his
con­

quests; and to the importunities of the Greeks, he piously replied, that no
human

consideration should tempt him to resume the gift which he had conferred on
the

Roman pontiff for the remission of his sins, and the salvation of his soul.
The

splendid donation was granted in supreme and absolute dominion, and the world

beheld for the first time a Christian bishop invested with the prerogatives of
a tempo­

ral prince; the choice of magistrates, the exercise of justice, the imposition
of taxes,

and the wealth of the palace of Ravenna. In the dissolution of the Lombard
king­

dom, the inhabitants of the duchy of Spoleto(4) sought a refuge from the
storm,

shaved their heads after the Roman fashion, declared themselves the servants

and subjects of St. Peter, and completed by this voluntary surrender, the pre­

sent circle of the ecclesiastical state. That mysterious circle was enlarged
to

an indefinite extent, by the verbal or written donation of Charlemagne,(5)

who, in the first transports of his Victory, despoiled himself and the Greek

emperor of the cities and islands which had formerly been annexed to the ex­

archate. But in the cooler moments of absence and reflection, he viewed, with

an eye of jealousy and envy, the recent greatness of his ecclesiastical ally.
The

execution of his own and his father's promises was respectfully eluded: the

(1) Paului Diaconus, who wrote before the empire of Charlemagne, describes
Rome as his subject city—ves-

'tras civitatM, (ad Pompeium Festum) suis addidit sceptris. (de Metensis
Ecclesise Episconis.) Some Carte-

vingian medals, struck at Home, have engaged Le Blanc to write an elaborate,
though partial dissertation on

their authority at Rome both as patricians and emperors. (Amsterdam, 1692, in
quarto.)

(2) Mosheim (Institution Hist. Eccles. p. 263.) weighs this donation with fair
and deliberate prndence. "The

original act has never been produced; but the Liber Pontificalis represents,
(p. 171..) and theCodex Carolinus

supposes, this ample gift. Both are colemporary records; aud the latter is
more authentic, since it has been

preserved, not in the papal, but the imperial library.

(3) Between the exorbitant claims, and narrow concessions of interest and
prejudice, from which even Mu-

ratori (Antiquitat. torn. i. p. 63—68.) is not exempt. I have been guided, in
the limits of the exarchate and

Pentapolis, by the Dissertatio Chorographica Italia Medii Mvi, torn. x. p.
160—180.

(4) Spoletini deprecnti sunt, ut eos in servitio B. Petri reciperet et more
Rornanornm tonsurart faceraf,

(Atiastasius, p. 185.) Yet it may be a question whether they gave their own
persons or their country.

(5) The policy and donations of Charlemagne are carefully examined by St.
Marc, (Abrege, torn. i. p. 390—

408.) who has well studied the Codex Carolinus. I believe, with him, that they
were only verbal. The most

ancient act of donation that pretends to be extant, is that of the emperor
Louis the Pious; (Signonius, de Reg­

no Italite, lib. iv. Qpenx, torn. ii. p. 267— 270.) its authenticity, or
at'least its integrity, are much questioned:

(Pagi, A. D. 817, no. 7, &c. Muratori, Annali. torn. vi. p. 432, &c.
Dissertat. Chorographica, p. 33,34.) bat I

s« no reasonable objection to these princes so freely disposing of what waj
not their own.

