OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

cours had arrived, he retired to his tent, assumed the dress and arms of a
private

soldier, and gave the signal of battle. The first line of cavalry advanced
with

more courage than discretion, and left behind them the infantry of the second
line.

They were soon engaged between the horns of a crescent, into which the adverse

wings had been insensibly curved, and were saluted from either side by the
volleys

of four thousand archers. Their ardour, and even their distress, drove them
for­

wards to a close and unequal conflict, in which they could only use their
lances

against an enemy equally skilled in all the instruments of war. A generous
emu­

lation inspired the Romans and their barbarian allies: and Narses, who calmly

viewed and directed their efforts, doubted to whom he should adjudge the prize
of

superior bravery. The Gothic cavalry was astonished and disordered, pressed

and broken; and the line of infantry, instead of presenting their spears, or
opening

their intervals, were trampled under the feet of the flying horse. Six
thousand

of the Goths were slaughtered, without mercy, in the field of Tagina. Their
prince,

with five attendants, was overtaken by Asbad, of the race of the Gepidx. *'
Spare

the king of Italy," cried a loyal voice, and Asbad struck his lance through
the

body of Totila. The blow was instantly revenged by the faithful Goths; they
trans­

ported their dying monarch seven miles beyond the scene of his disgrace; and
his

last moments were not imbittered by the presence of an enemy. Compassion af­

forded him the shelter of an obscure tomb; but the Romans were not satisfied
of

their victory, till they beheld the corpse of the Gothic king. His hat,
enriched

with gems, and his bloody robe, were presented to Justinian by the messengers
of

triumph. (1)

As soon as Narses had paid his devotions to the anthnr of victory, and the
blessed

Virgin, his peculiar patroness,(2) he praised, rewarded, and dismissed the
Lom­

bards. The villages had been reduced to ashes by these valiant savages; they
ra­

vished matrons and virgins on the altar; their retreat was diligently watched
by a

strong detachment of regular forces, who prevented a repetition of the like
disor­

ders. The victorious eunuch pursued his march through Tuscany, accepted the

submission of the Goths, heard the acclamations, and often the complaints, of
the

Italians, and encompassed the walls of Rome with the remainder of his
formidable

host. Round the wide circumference, Narses assigned to himself, and to each of

his lieutenants, a real or a feigned attack, while he silently marked the
place of

easy and unguarded entrance. Neither the fortifications of Hadrian's mole, nor
of

the port, could long delay the progress of the conqueror; and Justinian once
more

received the keys of Rome, which, under his reign, had been five times taken
and

recovered.(3) But the deliverance of Rome was the last calamity of the Roman

people. The barbarian allies of Narses too frequently confounded the
privileges

of peace and war: the despair of the flying Goths found some consolation in
sangui­

nary revenge: and three hundred youths, of the noblest families, who had been

sent as hostages beyond the Po, were inhumanly slain by the successor of
Totila.

The fate of the senate suggests an awful lesson of the vicissitude of human
affairs.

Of the senators whom Totila had banished from their country, some were rescued

by an officer of Belisarius, and transported from Campania to Sicily; while
others

were too guilty to confide in the clemency of Justinian, or too poor to
provide horses

for their escape to the sea-shore. Their brethren languished five years in a
state of

indigence and exile: the victory of Narses revived their hopes; but their
prema­

ture return to the metropolis was prevented by the furious Goths; and all the

fortresses of Campania were ruined with patrician(4) blood. After a period of
thir­

teen centuries, the institution of Romulus expired; and if the nobles of Rome
still

assumed the title of senators, few subsequent traces can be discovered of a
public

council, or constitutional order. Ascend six hundred years, and contemplate
the

kings of the earth soliciting an audience, as the slaves or freedmen of the
Roman

senate. (5)

The Gothic war was yet alive. The bravest of the nation retired beyond the

(1) Theophanes, Chron. p. 193. Hist. Miscell. lib. xvi. p. 103.

(!) Engriuf, lib. ir. c. 24. The inspiration of the Virgin revealed to Narses
the day, and the word of bat­

tle (Paul Diaeon. lib. ii. c. 3, p. 776.)

(3) Et» toutou G*a-iA.iueiPTo; to sts^itto, isXtt. In the year 536 by
Belisarius, in 546 by Totila, in 547 by

Belisarius, in 549 by Totila,and in 552 by Narses. Maltretus had inadvertently
translated sextum; a mistake

which he afterward retracts: but the mischief was done; and Cousin, with a
train of French and Latin rea­

ders, have fallen into the snare.

(4) Compare two passages of Proeopius (lib. iii. c. 26. lib. i». c. 24.)
which, with some collateral hints from

Mareellinus and Jornandes, illustrate the state of the expiring senate.

(5) See, in the example of Prusias, as it is delivered in tbe fragments of
Polybius, (Excerpt. Legal, xcvii. p.

927,928.) a curious picture of a royal slave.

