OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 245

conspired against their nephew, before, and after, the death of his father.
Their

first attempt was pardoned: for the second offence they were condemned to the

ecclesiastical state; and for the third treason, Nicephorus, the eldest and
most

guilty, was deprived of his eyes, and his four brothers, Christopher, Nicetas,

Anthemeus, and Eudoxas, were punished, as a milder sentence, by the amputation

of their tongues. After five years' confinement, they escaped to the church of
St,

Sophia, and displayed a pathetic spectacle to the people. "Countrymen and

Christians," cried Nicephorus for himself and his mute brethren, "behold the

sons of your emperor, if you can still recognize our features in this
miserable state.

A life, an imperfect life, is all that the malice of our enemies has spared.
It is

now threatened, and we now throw ourselves on your compassion." The rising

murmur might have produced a revolution, had it not been checked by the pre­

sence of a minister, who soothed the unhappy princes with flattery and hope,
and

gently drew them from the sanctuary to the palace. They were speedily em­

barked for Greece, and Athens was allotted for the place of their exile. In
this

calm retreat, and in their helpless condition, Nicephorus and his brothers
were

tormented by the thirst of power, and tempted by a Sclavonian chief, who
offered to

break their prison, and to lead them in arms, and in the purple, to the gates
of

Constantinople. But the Athenian people, ever zealous in the cause of Irene,

prevented her justice or cruelty; and the five sons of Copronymus were plunged

in eternal darkness and oblivion.

For himself, that emperor had chosen a barbarian wife, the daughter of the

khan of the Chozars: but in the marriage of his heir, he preferred an Athenian

virgin, an orphan, seventeen years old, whose sole fortune must have consisted
in

her personal accomplishments. The nuptials of Leo and Irene were celebrated

with royal pomp; she soon acquired the love and confidence of a feeble
husband,

and in his testament he declared the empress guardian of the Roman world, and

of their son Constantine VI. who was no more than ten years of age. During his

childhood Irene most ably and assiduously discharged in her public
administration

the duties of a faithful mother; and her zeal in the restoration of images has
de­

served the name and honours of a saint, which she still occupies in the Greek
ca­

lendar. But the emperor attained the maturity of youth; the maternal yoke be­

came more grievous; and he listened to the favourites of his own age, who
shared

his pleasures, and were ambitious of sharing his power. Their reasons
convinced

him of his right, their praises of his ability, to reign; and he consented to
reward

the services of Irene by a perpetual banishment to the isle of Sicily. But her

vigilance and penetration easily disconcerted their rash projects: a similar,
or

more severe punishment was retaliated on themselves and their advisers; and

Irene inflicted on the ungrateful prince the chastisement of a boy. After this

contest the mother and the son were at the head of two domestic factions; and,

instead of mild influence and voluntary obedience, she held in chains a
captive and

an enemy. The empress was overthrown by the abuse of victory; the oath of

fidelity which she exacted to herself alone, was pronounced with reluctant
mur­

murs; and the bold refusal of the Armenian guards encouraged a free and
general

declaration, that Constantine VI. was the lawful emperor of the Romans. In
this

character he ascended his hereditary throne, and dismissed Irene to a life of
soli­

tude and repose. But her haughty spirit condescended to the arts of
dissimulation :

she flattered the bishops and eunuchs, revived the filial tenderness of the
prince,

regained his confidence, and betrayed his credulity. The character of Constan­

tine was not less destitute of sense or spirit; but his education had been
studiously

neglected; and his ambitious mother exposed to the public censure the vices
which

she had nourished, and the actions which she had secretly advised; his divorce

and second marriage offended the prejudices of the clergy, and by his
imprudent

rigour he forfeited the attachment of the Armenian guards. A powerful conspi­

racy was formed for the restoration of Irene; and the secret, though widely
dif­

fused, was faithfully kept above eight months, till the emperor, suspicious of
his

clanger, escaped from Constantinople, with the design of appealing to the pro­

vinces and armies. By this hasty flight, the empress was left on the brink of
the

precipice; yet before she implored the mercy of her son, Irene addressed a
private

epistle to the friends whom she had placed about his person, with a menace,
that

unless they accomplished, she would reveal their treason. Their fear rendered

them intrepid; they seized the emperor on the Asiatic shore, and he was
transport­

ed to the Pophyry apartment of the palace where he had first seen the light.
In

the mind of Irene, ambition had stifled every sentiment of humanity and
nature;

