->4 THE DECLINE AND FALL

primitive lustre of St. Sophia, enumerates the colours, the shades, and the
spots

of ten or twelve marbles, jaspers, and porphyries, which nature had profusely
di­

versified, and which were blended and contrasted as it were by a skilful
painter.

The triumph of Christ was adorned with the last spoils of Paganism; but the

greater part of these costly stones was extracted from the quarries of Asia
Minor,

the isles and continent of Greece, Egypt, Africa and Gaul. Eight columns of

porphyry, which Aurelian had placed in the temple of the sun, were offered by

the piety of a Roman matron; eight others of green marble were presented by

the ambitious zeal of the magistrates of Ephesus: both are admirable by their

size and beauty; but every order of architecture disclaims their fantastic
capitals.

A variety of ornaments and figures was curiously expressed in mosaic; and the

images of Christ, of the Virgin, of saints, and of angels, which have been
defaced

by Turkish fanaticism, were dangerously exposed to the superstition of the
Greeks.

According to the sanctity of each object the precious metals were distributed
in

thin leaves or in solid masses. The balustrade of the choir, the capitals of
the

pillars, the ornaments of the doors and galleries, were of gilt bronze; the
spec­

tator was dazzled by the glittering aspect of the cupola; the sanctuary
contained

forty thousand pound weight of silver; and the holy vases and vestments of the

altar were of the purest gold, enriched with inestimable gems. Before the
struc­

ture of the church had risen two cubits above the ground, 45,2001. were
already

consumed; and the whole expense amounted to 320,000/.; each reader, according

to the measure of his belief, may estimate their value either in gold or
silver; but

the sum of 1,000,000/. sterling is the result of the lowest computation. A
magni­

ficent temple is a laudable monument of national taste and religion, and the
en­

thusiast who entered the dome of St. Sophia, might be tempted to suppose that
it

was the residence, or even the workmanship of the Deity. Yet how dull is the

artifice, how insignificant is the labour, if it be compared with the
formation of

the vilest insect that crawls upon the surface of the temple!

So minute a description of an edifice which time has respected, may attest the

truth, and excuse the relation of the innumerable works, both in the capital
and

provinces, which Justinian constructed on a smaller scale and less durable
founda­

tions. (1) In Constantinople alone, and the adjacent suburbs, he dedicated
twenty-

five churches to the honour of Christ, the Virgin, and the saints; most of
these

churches were decorated with marble and gold; and their various situation was

skilfully chosen in a populous square, or a pleasant grove; on the margin of
the

sea-shore, or on some lofty eminence which overlooked the continents of Europe

and Asia. The church of the holy apostles at Constantinople, and that of St.
John

at Ephesus, appear to have been framed on the same model: their domes aspired

to imitate the cupolas of St. Sophia; but the altar was more judiciously
placed un­

der the centre of the dome, at the junction of four stately porticos, which
more ac­

curately expressed the figure of the Greek cross. The virgin of Jerusalem
might

exult in the temple erected by her imperial votary on a most ungrateful spot,
which

afforded neither ground nor materials to the architect. A level was formed, by

laising part of a deep valley to the height of a mountain. The stones of a
neigh­

bouring quarry were hewn into regular forms; each block was fixed on a
peculiar

carriage, drawn by forty of the strongest oxen, and the roads were widened for
the

passage of such enormous weights. Lebanon furnished her loftiest cedars for
the

timbers of the church; and the seasonable discovery of a vein of red marble,
sup­

plied its beautiful columns, two of which, the supporters of the exterior
portico,

were esteemed the largest in the world. The pious munificence of the emperor

was diffused over the holy land: and if reason should condemn the monasteries
of

both sexes which were built or restored by Justinian, yet charity must applaud
the

wells which he sunk, and the hospitals which he founded, for the relief of the
wea­

ry pilgrims. The schismatical temper of Egypt was ill entitled to the royal
boun­

ty; but in Syria and Africa some remedies were applied to the disasters of
wars

and earthquakes, and both Carthage and Antiocn, emerging from their ruins,

Phrygian—of two sorw, both of a rosy hue; the one with a white shade, the
other purple, with silver flowers.

3. The Porphyry of Egypt-" with small stars. 4. The green marble of Lac onto.
5. The Carian—from Mount

lassii, with oblique veins, white and red. 6. The Lydian—pale, with a red
flower. 7. The African or Mauri-

tamos— of a gold or saffron hue. 8. The Celtic—black, with white veins. 9. The
Bosphoric—white, with

black edges. Besides the Proeannesian, which formed the pavement; the
Thessalian, Motossian, &c, which

are less distinctly painted.

(1) The six books of the edifices of Procopins, are thus distributed—The first
is confined to Constantino­

ple; the second includes Mesopotamia and Svria; the third, Armenia and the
Euxinc; the fourth, Eurcpej

the fifth, Asia Minor and Palestine; the sixth, Egypt and Africa. Italy is
forgot by the emperor or the histo­

rian, who published this work of adulation before the date (A.D. 555) of its
final conquest.

