THE DECLINE AND FALL

in the sunshine of the throne; and in his licentious pleasures, he forgot the
safety

both of the republic and of his family. Of a mild and religious character, he
re­

spected the sanctity of oaths, the innocence of the youth, the memory of his
parents,

and the attachment of the people. The studious temper and retirement of Con-

stantine disarmed the jealousy of power: his books and music, his pen and his
pen­

cil, were a constant source of amusement; and if he could improve a scanty
allow­

ance by the sale of his pictures, if their price was not enhanced by the name
of the

artist,- he was endowed with a personal talent, which few princes could employ
in

the hour of adversity.

The fall of Romanus was occasioned by his own vices and those of his children.

After the decease of Christopher, his eldest son, the two surviving brothers
quar­

relled with each other, and conspired against their father. At the hour of
noon,

when all strangers were regularly excluded from the palace, they entered his

apartment with an armed force, and conveyed him in the habit of a monk, to a

small island in the Propontis, which was peopled by a religious community. The

rumour of this domestic revolution excited a tumult in the city; but
Porphyroge-

nitus alone, the true and lawful emperor, was the object of the public care;
and

the sons of Lecapenus were taught, by tardy experience, that they had achieved

a guilty and perilous enterprise for the benefit of their rival. Their sister
Hele­

na, the wife of Constantine, revealed, or supposed their treacherous design of
as­

sassinating her husband at the royal banquet. His royal adherents were
alarmed;

and the two usurpers were prevented, seized, degraded from the purple, and em­

barked for the same island and monastery where their father had been so lately

confined. Old Romanus met them on the beach with a sarcastic smile, and, after

a just reproach of their folly and ingratitude,/presented his imperial
colleagues

with an equal share of his water and vegetable diet In the fortieth year of
his

reign', Constantine VII. obtained the possession of the eastern world, which
he

ruled, or seemed to ru!e,iiear fifteen years. But he was devoid of that energy
of

character which could emerge into a life of action and &lory: and the studies
which

had amused and dignified his leisure, were incompatible with the serious
duties of

a sovereign. The emperor neglected the practice, to instruct his son Romanus
in

the theory of government; while he indulged the habits of intemperance and
sloth,

he dropped the reins of the administration into the hands of Helena his wife,
and,

in the shifting scene of her favour and caprice, each minister was regretted
in the

promotion of a more worthless successor. Yet the birth and misfortunes of Con­

stantine had endeared him to the Greeks: they excused his failings; they
respected

his learning, his innocence, and charity, his love of justice; and the
ceremony of

his funeral was mourned with the unfeigned tears of his subjects! The body,
ac­

cording to ancient custom, lay in state in the vestibule of the palace; and
the civil

and military officers, the patricians, the senate, and the clergy, approached
in due

order to adore and kiss the inanimate corpse of their sovereign. Before the

procession moved towards the imperial sepulchre, a herald proclaimed this
awful

admonition:—" Arise, O king of the world, and obey the summons of the King of

kings!"

The death of Constantine was imputed to poison; and his son Romanus, who de­

rived that name from his maternal grandfather, ascended the throne of
Constanti­

nople. A prince who, at the age of twenty, could be suspected of anticipating
his

inheritance, must have been already lost in the public esteem; yet Romanus was

rather weak than wicked; and the largest share of the guilt was transferred to
his

wife, Theophano, a woman of base origin, masculine spirit, and flagitious man­

ners. The sense of personal glory, and public happiness, the true pleasures of

royalty, were unknown to the son of Constantine; and while the two brothers,
Ni-

cephorus and Leo, triumphed over the Saracens, the hours which the emperor

owed to his people were consumed in strenuous idleness. In the morning he
visit­

ed the circus: at noon he feasted the senators; the greater part of the
afternoon he

spent in the Sfiharisterium, or tennis court, the only theatre of his
victories; from

thence he passed over to the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus, hunted and killed
four

wild boars of the largest size, and returned to the palace proudly content
with the

labours of the day. In strength and beauty he was conspicuous above his
equals:

tall and straight as a young cypress, his complexion was fair and florid, his
eyes

sparkling, his shoulders broad, his nose long and aquiline. Yet even these
per­

fections were insufficient to fix the love of Theophano; and, after a reign of
four

years, she mingled for her husband the same deadly draught which she had com­

posed for his father. .

