OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 129

venerable name. An indulgent edict of the younger Theodosius excused liim

from the labour of comparing and weighing their arguments. Five civilians, Ca-

ius, Papinian, Paul, Ulpian, and Modestinus, were established as the oracles
of

jurisprudence: a majority was decisive; but if their opinions were equally
divided,

a casting vote was ascribed to the superior wisdom of Papinian. (1)

When Justinian ascended the throne, the reformation of the Roman jurispru­

dence was an arduous but indispensable task. In the space of ten centuries,
the

infinite variety of laws and equal opinions had filled many thousand volumes,
which

no fortune could purchase and no capacity could digest. Books could not easily

be found; and the judges, poor in the midst of riches, were reduced to the
exercise

of their illiterate discretion. The subjects of the Greek provinces were
ignorant

of the language that disposed of their lives and properties; and the barbarous
dia­

lect of the Latins was imperfectly studied in the academies of Berytus and
Con­

stantinople. As an Illyrian soldier, that idiom was familiar to the infancy of
Jus­

tinian; his youth had been instructed by the lessons of jurisprudence, and his
im­

perial choice selected the most learned civilians of the east, to labour with
their

sovereign in the work of reformation.(2) The theory of professors was assisted

by the practice of advocates, and the experience of magistrates; and the whole
un­

dertaking was animated by the spirit of Tribonian. (:>) This extraordinary
man,

the object of so much praise and censure, was a native of Side in Pamphylia;
and

his genius, like that of Bacon, embraced, as his own, all the business and
know­

ledge of the age. Tribonian composed, both in prose and verse, on a strange
di­

versity of curious and abstruse subjects (4)—a double panegyric of Justinian
and

the life of the philosopher Theodotus; the nature of happiness, and the duties
of

government; Homer's catalogue and the four-and-twenty sorts of metre; the
astro­

nomical canon of Ptolemy; the changes of the months; the houses of the
planets;

and the harmonic system of the world. To the literature of Greece he added the

use of the Latin tongue; the Roman civilians were deposited in his library and
in

his mind; and he most assiduously cultivated those arts which opened the road
of

wealth and preferment. From the bar of the pretorian prefects, he raised him­

self to the honours of questor, of consul, and of master of the offices: the
council

of Justinian listened to his eloquence and wisdom, and envy was mitigated by
the

gentleness and affability of his manners. The reproaches of impiety and
avarice

have stained the virtues or the reputation of Tribonian. In a bigoted and
persecu­

ting court, the principal minister was accused of a secret aversion to the
Christian

faith, and was supposed to entertain the sentiments of an atlieist and a
pagan,

which have been imputed, inconsistently enough, to the last philosophers of

Greece. His avarice was more clearly proved and more sensibly felt. If he were

swayed by gifts in the administration of justice, the example of Bacon will
again

occur; nor can the merit of Tribonian atone for his baseness, if he degraded
the

sanctity of his profession; and if laws were every day enacted, modified, or
re­

pealed, for the base consideration of his private emolument. In the sedition
of

Constantinople, his removal was granted to the clamours, perhaps to the just
in­

dignation of the people: but the questor was speedily restored, and till the
hour of

his death, he possessed, above twenty years, the favour and confidence of the
em­

peror. His passive and dutiful submission has been honoured with the praise of

Justinian himself, whose vanity was incapable of discerning how often that
sub­

mission degenerated into the grossest adulation. Tribonian adored the virtues
of

his gracious master: the earth was unworthy of such a prince; and he affected
a

(1) See the Theodosian Code, lib. i. tit. iv. witb Godefroy's Commentary,
torn. i. p. 30—35. This decree

alight give occasion to.Jesuitical disputes like those in the Lettres
Provinciales, whether a judge was obliged

to follow the opinion of Papinian, or of a majority, against his judgment,
against his conscience, &c. Yet a

legislator might give that opinion, however false, the validity, not of truth,
but of law.

(2) For the legal labours of Justinian, I have studied the preface to the
Institutes; the first, second, and third

prefaces to the Pandects; the first and second preface to the Code; and the
Code itself (lib. i. tit. xvii. de Veterl

Jure enoeleaudo.) After these original testimonies, I have consulted, among
the moderns, Heineccins (Hist.

J. R. No. 38S—404,,) Terasson (Hist, de la Jurisprudence Romaine. p.
295—356..) Gravina (Opp. p. 93—100..)

and Ludewig, in his life of Justinian (p. 10—123. 318—321., for the Code and
Novels, p. 209—261., for the Di­

gest or Pandects, p. 262—317.)

(3) For the character of Tribonian, see the testimonies of ProcopUis (Persic,
lib. i. c. 23,24. Anecdot. e. 3,

20.) and Suidas (torn. iii. p. 501. edit. Kuster.) Ludewig (in Vit. Justinian.
175—209.) works hard, very hard, to

white-wash—the black-a-moor.

(4) I apply the two passages of Suidas to the same man; every circumstance so
exactly tallies. Yet the law­

yers appear ignorant; and Fabricius is inclined to separate the two characters
(Biblior. Grac. torn. i. n. 342, <*.

p. 518.3. p. 411.12. p. 346. 353. 474.)

V01. Ill 17

