OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 77

t)ves of the strongest and most populous of nations, the invincible, the
irresistible

Avare. We are willing to devote ourselves to your service: we are able to van­

quish and destroy all the enemies who now disturb your repose. But we expect,

as the price of our alliance, as the reward of our valour, precious gifts,
annual sub'

sidies, and fruitful possessions." At the time of this embassy, Justinian had

reigned above thirty, he had lived above seventy-five years; his mind as well
as

his body, was feeble and languid; and the conqueror of Africa and Italy,
careless

of the permanent interests ot his people, aspired only to end his days in the
bosom

even of inglorious peace. In a studied oration, he imparted to the senate his
reso­

lution to dissemble the insult, and to purchase the friendship, of the Avars;
and

the whole senate, like the mandarins of China, applauded the incomparable wis­

dom and foresight of their sovereign. The instruments of luxury were immedi­

ately prepared to captivate the barbarians: silken garments, soft and splendid
beds,

and chains and collars incrusted with gold. The ambassadors, content with such

a liberal reception, departed from Constantinople, and Valentin, one of the
empe­

ror's guards, was sent with a similar character to their camp at the foot of
mount

Caucasus. As their destruction or their success must be alike advantageous to
the

empire, he persuaded them to invade the enemies of Rome; and they were easily

tempted, by gifts and promises, to gratify their ruling inclinations. These
fugi­

tives, who fled before the Turkish arms, passed the Tanais and Borysthenes,
and

boldly advanced into the heart of Poland and Germany, violating the law of na­

tions, and abusing the rights of victory. Before ten years had elapsed, their
camps

were seated on the Danube and the Elbe, many Bulgarian and Sclavonian names

were obliterated from the earth, and the remainder of their tribes are found,
as tri­

butaries and vassals, under the standard of the Avars. The chagan, the
peculiar

title of their king, still affected to cultivate the friendship of the
emperor; and Jus­

tinian ■entertained some thoughts of fixing them in Pannonia, to balance the
pre­

vailing power of the Lombards. But the virtue or treachery of an Avar betrayed

the secret enmity and ambitious designs of their countrymen: and they loudly
com­

plained of the timid, though jealous policy, of detaining their ambassadors,
and

denying the arms which they had been allowed to purchase in the capital of

the empire.(l)

Perhaps the apparent change in the dispositions of the emperors, may be ascri­

bed to the embassy which was received from the conquerors of the Avars. (2)
The

immense distance, which eluded their arms, could not extinguish their
resentment:

the Turkish ambassadors pursued the footsteps of the vanquished to the Jaik,
the

Volga, mount Caucasus, the Euxine, and Constantinople, and at length appeared

before the successor of Constantine, to request that he would not espouse the

cause of rebels and fugitives. Even commerce had some share in this remarkable

negotiation: and the Sogdoites, who were now the tributaries of the Turks, em­

braced the fair occasion of opening, by the north of the Caspian, a new road
for

the importation of Chinese silk into the Roman empire. The Persian, who pre­

ferred the navigation of Ceylon, had stopped the caravans of Bochara and
Samar-

cand: their silk was contemptuously burnt: some Turkish ambassadors died in

Persia, with a suspicion of poison; and the great khan permitted his faithful
vas­

sal Maniach, the prince of the Sogdoites, to propose, at the Byzantine court,
a

treaty of alliance against their common enemies. Their splendid apparel and
rich

presents, the fruit of oriental luxury, distinguished Maniach and his
colleagues

from the rude savages of the north: their letters, in the Scythian character
and

language, announced a people who had attained the rudiments of science;(3)
they

enumerated the conquests, they offered the friendship and military aid of the

Turks; and their sincerity was attested by direful imprecations (if they were
guil-

tv of falsehood) against their own head, and the head of Disabul their master.

The Greek prince entertained with hospitable regard the ambassadors of a
remote

and powerful monarch: the sight of silkworms and looms disappointed the hopes

(1) The embassies and first conquests of the Avars may be read in Menander
(Excerpt. l>gat. p. 99—10!.

154, 155..) Theophanes (p. 156.,) the Historia Miscella(lib. xvi.p. 109.,) and
Gregory of Tours (lib. iv. c. 23.29.

^in the Historians of France, torn. ii. p. 314.217.)

(2) Theophanes (Chvon. p. 204.) and the Hist. Miscella (lib. xvi. p. 110..) as
understood by De Guignet (com.

s. part 2. p. 354..) appear to speak of a Turkish embassy to Justinian
himself; but that of Maniach* in the

fourth year of his successor Justin, is positively the first that reached
Constantinople (Menander, p. 108.)

(3) The Russians have found characters, rude hieroglyphics, on the Irtish and
Yeniser, on medals, tombs,

idols, rocks, obelisks. &c. (Slrahlenberg, Hist, of Siberia, p. 324. 348.
428,429.) Dr. Hyde (de Religione Vete-

rum Persarum, p. 521, See.) has given two alphabets of Thibet and of the
Eygours. I have long harbonred

a suspicion that atftlie Scythian, and tome, perhaps much, of the Indian
science, was derived from fiie Greeks

of Bactriana.

