OF THE ROMAN EMPIUE.

rice conspired to destroy the troops whom he had laboured to reform: the
miscon­

duct and favour of Commentiolus are imputed to this malevolent design; and
every

age must condemn the inhumanity or avarice(l) of a prince, who by the trifling
ran­

som of six thousand pieces of gold, might have prevented the massacre of
twelve

thousand prisoners in the hands of the chagan. In the first fervour of
indignation,

an order was signified to the army of the Danube, that they should spare the
mag­

azines of the province, and establish their winter-quarters in the hostile
country

of the Avars. The measure of their grievances was full: they pronounced Mau­

rice unworthy to reign, expelled or slaughtered his faithful adherents, and,
under

the command of Phocas, a simple centurion, returned by hasty marches to the

neighbourhood of Constantinople. After a long series of legal succession, the
mi­

litary disorders of the third century were again revived; yet such was the
novelty

of the enterprise, that the insurgents were awed by their own rashness. They

hesitated to invest their favourite with the vacant purple; and while they
rejected

all treaty with Maurice himself, they held a friendly correspondence with his
son

Theodosius; and with Germanus, the father-in-law of the royal youth. So ob­

scure had been the former condition of Phocas, that the emperor was quite
igno­

rant of the name and character of his rival: but as soon as he learned, that
the

centurion, though bold in sedition, was timid in the face of danger, Alas!
(cried

the desponding prince) if he is a coward, he will surely be a murderer.

Yet if Constantinople had been firm and faithful, the murderer might have

spent his fury against the walls; and the rebel army would have been gradually

consumed or reconciled by the prudence of the emperor. In the games of the

circus, which he repeated with unusual pomp, Maurice disguised, with smiles of

confidence, the anxiety of his heart, condescended to solicit the applause of
the

factions, and flattered their pride by accepting from their respective
tribunes a

list of nine hundred blues and fifteen hundred greens, whom he affected to
esteem

his weakness and hastened his fall; the green faction were the secret
accomplices

of the rebels, and the blues recommended lenity and moderation in a contest
with

their Roman brethren. The rigid and parsimonious virtues of Maurice had long

since alienated the hearts of his subjects; as he walked barefoot in a
religious pro­

cession, he was rudely assaulted with stones, and his guards were compelled to

present their iron maces inthe defence of his person. A fanatic monk ran
through

the streets with a drawn sword, denouncing against him the wrath and the sen­

tence of God; and a vile plebeian, who represented his countenance and
apparel,

was seated on an ass, and pursued by the imprecations of the multitude. (2)
The

emperor suspected the popularity of Germanus with the soldiers and citizens;
he

feared, he threatened, but he delayed to strike; the patrician fled to the
sanctuary

of the church; the people rose in his defence, the walls were deserted by the

guards, and the lawless city was abandoned to the flames and rapine of a
noctur­

nal tumult. In a small bark the unfortunate Maurice, with his wife and nine

children, escaped to the Asiatic shore; but the violence of the wind compelled

him to land at the church of St. Autonomus,(3) near Chalcedon, from whence he

despatched Theodosius, his eldest son, to implore the gratitude and friendship
of

the Persian monarch. For himself, he refused to fly; his body was tortured
with

sciatic pains,(4) his mind was enfeebled by superstition; he patiently awaited
the

event of the revolution, and addressed a fervent and public prayer to the
Almighty,

that the punishment of his sins might be inflicted in this world rather than
in 3

future life. After the abdication of Maurice, the two factions disputed the
choice

of an emperor; but the favourite of the blues, was rejected by the jealousy of

(1) Theophylact and Theophanes teem ignorant or the conspiracy ami avarice of
Maurice. These charges,,

so unfavourable to the memory of that emperor, are first mentioned by the
author of the Paschal Chronicle

(p. 379,380.:) from whence Zonaras (torn. ii. lib. 14. p. IT, 78.) has
transcribed them. Cedrenus (p. 390.) has fol­

lowed another computation of the ransom.

(2) In their clamours against Maurice, the people of Constantinople branded
him with the name of Marciff-

nite of Marcionist: a heresy, (says Theopltylacr, lib. viii. c. 9.) fur* tivcc
*u«p»; ,trt.x,8i»»; euxSik rt kxi wwwjt-

x*tto;. Did tiiey only cast out a vague reproach, or had the emperor really
listened to some obscure teacher of

those ancient Gnostics ?

(3) The church of St. Antonomus (whom I have not the honour to know) was one
hundred and fifty stadia

from Constantinople. (Theophylact, lib. viii. c. 9.) The port of Eutropius,
where Maurice and his children

were murdered, is described by Gyllius (de Bosphoro Thracio, lib. iii. c. 11.)
as one of the two harbours of

Chalcedon.

(4) The inhabitants of Constantinople were generally subject to the voo-oi
apfipuriJij; and Theophylact in­

sinuates (lib. viii. c. 9.) that if it were consistent with the rules of
history, he could assign the medical cause.

Yet suoh a digression would not have been more impertinent than his inquiry
(lib. vii, c. lfi, 17.) into the an­

nual inundations of the Nile, and ail the opinions of the Greek philosophers
on that subject-

as the solid pillars of his throne.

