210 THE DECLINE AND PALL

throne was distant and inaccessible; but they instantly resolved to bestow orr
the

flock of Ephesus the blessings of a faithful shepherd- By the vigilance of
Mem-

non, the churches were shut against them, and a strong garrison was thrown
into

the cathedral. The troops, under the command of Candidian, advanced to the

assault; the outguards were routed and put to the sword, but the place was im­

pregnable: the besiegers retired; their retreat was pursued by a vigorous
sally;

they lost their horses, and many of the soldiers were dangerously wounded with

clubs and stones. Ephesus, the city of the Virgin, was defiled with rage and

clamour, with sedition and blood; the rival synods darted anathemas and excom­

munications from their spiritual engines; and the court of Theodosius was per­

plexed by the adverse and contradictory narratives of the Syrian and Egyptian

factions. During a busy period of three months, the emperor tried every
method,

except the most effectual means of indifference and contempt, to reconcile
this

theological quarrel. He attempted to remove or intimidate the leaders by a
com­

mon sentence of acquittal or condemnation; he invested his representatives at

Ephesus with ample power and military force; he summoned from either party

eight chosen deputies to a free and candid conference in the neighbourhood of
the

capital.far from the contagion of popular frenzy. But the orientals refused to

yield, and the catholics, proud of their numbers and of their Latin allies,
rejected

all terms of union or toleration. The patience of the meek Theodosius was pro­

voked, and he dissolved in anger this episcopal tumult, which at the distance
of

thirteen centuries assumes the venerable aspect of the third oecumenical coun-

cil.(l) "God is my witness," said the pious prince, " that I am not the author

of this confusion. His providence will discern and punish the guilty. Return
to

your provinces, and may your private virtues repair the mischief and scandal
of

your meeting." They returned to their provinces; but the same passions which

had distracted the synod of Ephesus were diffused over the eastern world.
After

three obstinate and equal campaigns, John of Antioch and Cyril of Alexandria

condescended to explain and embrace: but their seeming re-union must be im­

puted rather to prudence than to reason, to the mutual lassitude rather than
to the

Christian charity of the patriarchs.

The Byzantine pontiff had instilled into the royal ear a baleful prejudice
against

the character and conduct of his Egyptian rival. An epistle of menace and in­

vective, (2) which accompanied the summons, accused him as a busy, insolent,

and envious priest, who perplexed the simplicity of the faith, violated the
peace

of the church and state, and by his artful and separate addresses to the wife
and

sister of Theodosius, presumed to suppose, or to scatter, the seeds of discord
in

the imperial family. At the stern command of his sovereign, Cyril had repaired

to Ephesus, where he was resisted, threatened and confined, by the magistrates
in

the interest of Nestorius and the orientals; who assembled the troops of Lydia
and

Ionia to suppress the fanatic and disorderly train of the patriarch. Without
ex­

pecting the royal license, he escaped from his guards, precipitately
embarked,,

deserted the imperfect synod, and retired to his episcopal fortress of safety
and

independence! But his artful emissaries, both in the court and city,
successfully

laboured to appease the resentment, and to conciliate the favour, of the
emperor.

The feeble son of Arcadius was alternately swayed by his wife and sister, by
the

eunuchs and women of the palace; superstition and avarice were their ruling
pas­

sions; and the orthodox chiefs were assiduous in their endeavours to alarm the

former, and to gratify the latter. Constantinople and the suburbs were
sanctified

with frequent monasteries, and the holy abbots, Dalmatius and Eutyches,(3) had

devoted their zeal and fidelity to the cause of Cyril, the worship of Mary,
and the

unity of Christ. From the first moment of their monastic life, they had never

mingled with the world, or trod the profane ground of the city. But in this
awful

moment of the danger of the church, their vow was superseded by a more sub­

lime and indispensable duty. At the head of a long order of monks and hermits,

were mutually forgotten. The style of declamation most never be confounded
with the genuine sense which

respectable enemies entertain of each other's merit. (Coneil. torn. iii. p.
1244.)

(1) Jte the Acts of the Synod of Ephesus, in the original Greek, and a Latin
version almost cotemporary

(Conew. torn. iii. p. 991—1339. with the Synodicon adversus Tragsediam
Irensei, torn. it. p. 835—497.,) the Ec­

clesiastical Histories of Socrates (lib. vii. c. 34.,) and Evagrius (lib. i.
e. 3—5.)) the Breviary of Liberatus (in

Concil. torn. vi. p. 419—459. c. 5,6.) and the Memoires Eccles. of Tillemont
(torn. xir. p. 377—487.)

(2) I should be curious to know how much Nestorius paid for these expressions,
so mortifying to his rival.)

f3) Eutyches, the heresiaroh Eutyches, is honourably named by Cyril as a
friend, a saint, and the strenuous

defender of the faith. His brother, the abbot Dalmatius, is likewise employed
to bind the emperor and all his

chamberlains ttrribili conjuration?. Synodicon. c. 203. in Concil. torn. ir.
p. 467.

