OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 339

religion and empire of the Saracens. The tumult was appeased by the disinte­

rested resolution of Omar, who suddenly renouncing his own pretensions,
stretched

forth his hand, and declared himself the first subject of the mild and
venerable

Abubeker. The urgency of the moment, and the acquiescence of the people,

might excuse this illegal and precipitate measure; but Omar himself confessed

from the pulpit, that if any Mussulman should hereafter presume to anticipate
the

suffrage of his brethren, both the elector and the elected would be worthy of

death. (1) After the simple inauguration of Abubeker, he was obeyed in Medina,

Mecca, and the provinces of Arabia; the Hashemites alone declined the oath of

fidelity; and their chief, in his own house, maintained, above six months, a
sullen

and independent reserve: without listening to the threats of Omar,
whoattempted

to consume with fire the habitation of the daughter of the apostle. The death
of

Fatima, and the decline of his party, subdued the indignant spirit of Ali; he
con­

descended to salute the commander of the faithful, accepted his excuse of the
ne­

cessity of preventing their common enemies, and wisely rejected his courteous
of­

fer of abdicating the government of the Arabians. After a reign of two years,

the aged caliph was summoned by the angel of death. In his testament, with the

tacit approbation of the companions, he bequeathed the sceptre to the firm and

intrepid virtue of Omar. "I have no occasion," said the modest candidate, "
for

the place."—" But the place has occasion for you," replied Abubeker; who ex­

pired with a fervent prayer that the god of Mahomet would ratify his choice,
and '

direct the Mussulmans in the way of concord and obedience. The prayer was not

ineffectual, since Ali himself, in a life of privacy and prayer, professed to
revere

the superior worth and dignity of his rival; who comforted him for the loss of
em­

pire, by the most flattering marks of confidence and esteem. In the twelfth
year

of his reign, Omar received a mortal wound from the hand of an assassin; he
re­

jected with equal impartiality the names of his son and of Ali, refused to
load his

conscience with the sins of his successor, and devolved on six of the most
respec­

table companions, the arduous task of electing a commander of the faithful. On

this occasion, Ali was again blamed by his friends(2) for submitting his right
to the

judgment of men, for recognising their jurisdiction by accepting a place among

the six electors. He might have obtained their suffrage, had he deigned to
pro­

mise a strict and servile conformity, not only to the Koran and tradition, but
like­

wise to the determinations of two seniors. (3) With these limitations, Othman,

the secretary of Mahomet, accepted the government, nor was it till after the
third

caliph, twenty-four years after the death of the prophet, that Ali was
invested

by the popular choice, with the regal and sacerdotal office. The manners of
the

Arabians retained their primitive simplicity, and the son of Abu Taleb
despised

the pomp and vanity of this world. At the hour of prayer, he repaired to the

mosch of Medina, clothed in a thin cotton gown, a coarse turban on his head,
his

slippers in one hand, and his bow in the other, instead of a walking staff.
The

companions of the prophet, and the chiefs of the tribes saluted their new
sove­

reign, and gave him their right hands as a sign of fealty and allegiance.

The mischiefs that flow from the contests of ambition are usually confined to
the

times and countries in which they had been agitated. But the religious discord

of-the friends and enemies of Ali has been renewed in every age of the Hegira,

and is still maintained in the immortal hatred of the Persians and Turks. (4)
The

former, who are branded with the appellation of Shiites or sectaries, have
enriched

the Mahometan creed with a new article of faith; and if Mahomet be the
apostle,

his companion Ali is the vicar, of God. In their private converse, in their
public

worship, they bitterly execrate the three usurpers who intercepted his
indefeasi­

ble right to the dignity of imam and caliph; and the name of Omar expresses in

(1) Ockley, (Ilist.of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 5,6.) from an Arabian MS.
represents Ayesba as averse to the

substitution of her father in the place of the apostle. This fact, so
improbable in itself, is unnoticed by Abnt-

feda, Al Jannabi, and Al Bochan, the last of whom quotes the tradition of
Ayesha herself. (Vit. Mohammed, p.

136. Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 236.)

(2) Particularly by his friend and cousin Abdallah, the son of Abbas, who died
A. D. 687. with the title of

grand doctor of the Moslems. In Abulfedahe recapitulated the important
occasions in which Ali had neglected

his salutary advice (p. 76. vers. Reiske;) and concludes, (p. 85.) O princeps
fidelium, absque controversia tu

quidem vere fortis es, at inops boni consilii, et rerum gerendarum parum
callens.

(3) I suspect that the two seniors (Abulpharagius, p. 115. Ockley, tool. i. p.
371.) may signify not two actual

counsellors, but his two predecessors, Abubeker and Omar.

(4) The schism of the Persians is explained by all our travellers of the last
century, especially in the second

and fourth volumes of their master, Chardin. Niebuhr, though of infinite
merit, has the advantage of writing

so late as the year 1764. (Voyages en Arabie, &c. torn. ii. p. 208—233.) since
the ineffectual attempt of Nadir

Shah to change the religion of the nation. (See his Fenian history translated
into French by Sir William

Jones, torn. ii. p. 5,6. 47,48.144—155.)

