16 THE DECLINE AND FALL

eighty, or one hundred days: as soon as they had passed the Jazartes, they
entered

the desert; and the wandering hordes, unless they are restrained by armies and

garrisons, have always considered the citizen and the traveller as the objects
of law­

ful rapine. To escape the Tartar robbers, and the tyrants of Persia, the silk
ca­

ravans explored a more southern road; they traversed the mountains of Thibet,

descended the streams of the Ganges or the Indus, and patiently expected in
the

ports of Guzerat and Malabar, the annual fleets of the west.(l) But the
dangers

of the desert were found less intolerable than toil, hunger, and the loss of
time;

the attempt was seldom renewed, and the only European, who has passed that

unfrequented way, applauds his own diligence, that, in nine months after his
de­

parture from Pekin, he reached the mouth of the Indus. The ocean, however,

was open to the free communication of mankind. From the great river to the

tropic of Cancer, the provinces of China were subdued and civilized by the em­

perors of the north; they were filled about the time of the Christian era with
ci­

ties and men, mulberry-trees and their precious inhabitants; and if the
Chinese,

with the knowledge of the compass, had possessed the genius of the Greeks or

Phoenicians, they might have spread their discoveries over the southern hemi­

sphere. I am not qualified to examine, and I am not disposed to believe, their
dis­

tant voyages to the Persian gulf, or the Cape of Good Hope: but their
ancestors

might equal the labours and success of the present race, and the sphere of
their

navigation might extend from the isles of Japan to the straits of Malacca, the
pil­

lars, if we may apply that name, of an Oriental Hercules. (2) Without losing

sight of land, they might sail along the coast to the extreme promontory of
Achin,

which is annually visited by ten or twelve ships laden with the productions,
the

manufactures, and even the artificers, of China; the island of Sumatra and
the*

opposite peninsula, are faintly delineated(S) as the regions of gold and
silver; and

the trading cities named in the geography of Ptolemy, may indicate, that this

wealth was not solely derived from the mines. The direct interval between Su­

matra and Ceylon is about three hundred leagues; the Chinese and Indian navi­

gators were conducted by the flight of birds and periodical winds, and the
ocean

might be securely traversed in square-built ships, which, instead of iron,
were

sewed together with the strong thread of the cocoa-nut. Ceylon, Serendib, or

Taprobana, was divided between two hostile princes; one of whom possessed the

mountains, the elephants, and the luminous carbuncle, and the other enjoyed
the

more solid riches of domestic industry, foreign trade, and the capacious
harbour

of Trinquemale, which received and dismissed the fleejs of the east and west.

In this hospitable isle, at an equal distance (as it was computed) from their
re­

spective countries, the silk merchants of China, who had collected in their
voy­

ages, aloes, cloves, nutmeg, and santal wood, maintained a free and beneficial
com­

merce with the inhabitants of the Persian gulf. The subjects of the great king

exalted, without a rival, his power and magnificence; and the Roman, who

confounded their vanity by comparing his paltry coin with a gold medal of the

emperor Anastasius, had sailed to Ceylon in an Ethiopian ship as a simple pas­

senger.^)

As silk became of indispensable use, the emperor Justinian saw, with concern,

that the Persians had occupied by land and sea the monopoly of this important

supply, and that the wealth of his subjects was continually drained by a
nation of

enemies and idolaters. An active government would have restored the trade of

Egypt and the navigation of the Red Sea, which had decayed with the prosperity

of the empire; and the Roman vessels might have sailed, for the purchase of

silk, to the ports of Ceylon, of Malacca, or even of China. Justinian embraced
a

more humble expedient, and solicited the aid of his Christian allies the Ethi­

opians of Abyssinia, who had recently acquired the arts of navigation, the
spirit

(1) The roads from China to Persia and Hindostan may be investigated in the
relations of Hackluyt and

Therenot (the ambassadors of Sharokh, Anthony Jenkinson, the Fere Greuber, &c.
See likewise HanwBy's

Travels, vol. i. p. 345—357.) A communication through Thibet has been lately
explored by the English so­

vereign of Bengal.

(2) For the Chinese navigation to Malacca and Achin. perhaps to Ceylon, see
Henaudot (on the two Maho­

metan Travellers, p. 8—11.13—17.141— 1J7.,) Dampier (vol. ii. p. 136.,) the
Hist. Philosophique des deux In-

des, torn. i. p. 98.,) and the Hist. Generates des Voyages (torn. vi. p. 201.)

(3) The knowledge, or rather ignorance, of Strabo, Pliny, Ptolemy, Arrian,
Mareian, &e. of the countries

'eastward of Cape Comorin,is finely Illustrated by d'Anville (Antiquite
Geographique de l'lnde, especially p.

161—198.) Our geography of India is improved by commerce and conquest: and has
been illnstrated by the

excellent maps and memoirs of Major Rennel. If lie extends the sphere of his
inquiries with the same criti­

cal knowledge and sagacity, he wifi succeed, and may surpass, the first of
modern geographers.

(4) The Taprobane of Pliny (6.24.,) Solinus (c. 53.,) and Salmas. Plinianse
Exercitat. (p. 781, 782.,) and most

of the ancients, who often confound the islands of Ceylon and Sumatra, is more
clearly described by Cosmaf

Sndieopleustes; yet even the Christian topographer has exaggerated its
dimensions. His reformation on the

Indian and Chinese trade is rare and curious (fib. ii. p. 138. lib. xi. p.
337,333. edit. Montfancon.l

