OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

abuse, or even the use of wine was chastised by fourscore strokes on the soles
of

the feet, and in the fervour of their primitive zeal, many secret sinners
revealed

their fault, and solicited their punishment. After some hesitation, the
command

of the army was delegated to Abu Obeidah, one of the fugitives of Mecca and

companions of Mahomet; whose zeal and devotion were assuaged, without being

abated, by the singular mildness and benevolence of his temper. But in all the

emergencies of war, the soldiers demanded the superior genius of Caled; and

whoever might be the choice of the prince, the sword of God was both in fact

and fame the foremost leader of the Saracens. He obeyed without reluctance;

he was consulted without jealousy; and such was the spirit of the man, or
rather

of the times, that Caled professed his readiness to serve under the banner of
the

faith, though it were in the hands of a child or an enemy. Glory, and riches,
and

dominion, were indeed promised to the victorious Mussulman; but he was care­

fully instructed, that if the goods of this life were his only incitement,
they like­

wise would be his only reward.

One of the fifteen provinces of Syria, the cultivated lands to the eastward of

the Jordan, had been decorated by Roman vanity with the name of Arabiai{Y)

and the first arms of the Saracens were justified by the semblance of a
national

right. The country was enriched by the various benefits of trade; by the vigi­

lance of the emperors it was covered with a line of forts; and the populous
cities

of Gerasa, Philadelphia, and Bosra,(2) were secure, at least from a surprise,
by

the solid structure of their walls. The last of these cities was the
eighteenth

station of Medina: the road was familiar to the caravans of Hejaz and Irak,
who

annually visited this plenteous market of the province and the desert: the
per­

petual jealousy of the Arabs had trained the inhabitants to arms; and twelve

thousand horse could sally from the gates of Bosra, an appellation which
signi­

fies, in the Syriac language, a strong tower of defence. Encouraged by their
first

success against the open towns and flying parties of the borders, a detachment
of

four thousand Moslems presumed to summon and attack the fortress of Bosra.

They were oppressed by the numbers of the Syrians; they were saved by the

presence of Caled, with fifteen hundred horse; he blamed the enterprise,
restored

the battle, and rescued his friend, the venerable Serjabil, who had vainly
invoked

the unity of God and the promise of the apostle. After a short repose, the
Mos­

lems performed their ablutions with sand instead of water;(3) ana the morning

prayer was recited by Caled before they mounted on horseback. Confident of

their strength, the people of Bosra threw open their gates, drew their forces
into

the plain, and swore to die in the defence of their religion. But a religion
of

peace was incapable of withstanding the fanatic ciy of Fight, fightl Paradise,

paradise.' that re-echoed in the ranks of the Saracens; and the uproar of the

town, the ringing of bells,(4) and the exclamations of the priests and monks,
in­

creased the dismay and disorder of the Christians. With the loss of two
hundred

and thirty men, the Arabs remained masters of the field; and the ramparts of

Bosra, in expectation of human or divine aid, were crowded with holy crosses
and

consecrated banners. The governor Romanus had recommended an early sub­

mission ; despised by the people, and degraded from his office, he still
retained

the desire and opportunity of revenge. In a nocturnal interview, he informed

the enemy of a subterraneous passage from his house under the wall of the
city:

the son of the caliph, with a hundred volunteers, were committed to the faith
of

this new ally, and their successful intrepidity gave an easy entrance to their
com­

panions. After Caled had imposed the terms of servitude and tribute, the apos­

tate or convert avowed in the assembly of the people his meritorious treason.

"I renounce your society," said Romanus, " both in this world, and the world
to

(!) Huic Arabia est conserta, ex alio latere Nahathrcis contiirua; opima
varietate commerciorum, castrisque

oppleta validis et castellis, quae ad repellendos gentium vicinarum excursus,
solicitudo pervigil neterum per op-

portnnos saltus erexit et cautei. Amraian. Marcellin. 14. 8. He land.
Palestin. torn. i. p. 85, 86.

(2) With Gerasa and Philadelphia, Ammianus praises the fortifications of Bosra
firmitate cautissitnas. They

deserted the same praise in the time of Abnlfeda, (Tabid. Syria;, p. 99.) who
describes the city, the metropolis

-of Hawran (Auranitis,) four days' journey from Damascus. The Hebrew etymology I learn from Reland. Pa­  
lestin. torn. ii. p. 666.

(3) The apostle of a desert and an army was obliged to allow this ready
succedaneum for water; (Koran, c. 3.

p. 66. C. 5. p. 83.) but the Arabian and Persian casuists have embarrassed his
free permission with many niceties

and distinction;. Reland. de Relic;. Mohammed, lib. i. p. 82, 83. Chardin,
Voyages en Perse, torn, iv.)

(4) The belli rung! Oekley, vol. i. p. 38. Yet I much doubt whether this
expression can be justified by the

text of Al Wakidi, or the practice of the times. Ad Grzcos, says the learned
Ducangc, (Glossar. med. et

innrn. Grsecitat. torn. i. p. 774.) campanarum usus serius transit et etiam
num rarissimus est. The otdest ex­

ample which he can find m the Byzantine writers is of the vear 1040; but the
Venetians pretend, that they in­

troduced bells at Constantinople in the ninth century.

