OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 33

composed seven hundred lines. His sagacious mind explored the deepest
questions

of morals, and metaphysics, ami he ventured to urge eighteen arguments against

the Christian doctrine of the creation of the world. But, in the intervals of
study,

he fiersonally conversed with Pan, JEsculapius, and Minerva, in whose
mysteries

he was secretly initiated, and whose prostrate statues he adored; in
the'devout

persuasion that the philosopher, who is a citizen of the universe, should be
the

priest of its various deities. An eclipse of the sun announced his approaching
end;

and his life, with that of his scholar Isidore,(l) compiled by two o£ their
most

learned disciples, exhibits a deplorable picture of the second childhood of
human

reason. Yet the golden chain, as it was fondly styled, of the Platonic
succession,

continued forty-four years from the death of Proclus, to the edict of
Justinian,(2)

■which imposed a perpetual silence on the schools of Athens, and excited the
grief

and indignation of the few remaining votaries of Grecian science and
superstition.

Seven friends and philosophers, Diogenes and Hermias, Eulalius and Priscian,

Damascius, Isidore and Simplicius, who dissented from the religion of their
sove­

reign, embraced the resolution of seeking in a foreign land the freedom which
was

denied in their native country. They had heard, and they credulously believed,

that the republic of Plato was realized in the despotic government of Persia,
and

that a patriot king reigned over the happiest and most virtuous of nations.
They

were soon astonished by the natural discovery that Persia resembled the other

countries of the globe; that Chosroes, who affected the name of a philosopher,
was

vain, cruel and ambitious; that bigotry, and a spirit of intolerance,
prevailed among

the Magi; that the nobles were haughty, the courtiers servile, and the
magistrates

unjust; that the guilty sometimes escaped, and that the innocent were often
op­

pressed. The disappointment of the philosophers, provoked them to overlook the

real virtues of the Persians; and they were scandalized, more deeply perhaps
than

became their profession, with the plurality'of wives and concubines, the
incestuous

marriages, and the custom of exposing dead bodies to the dogs and vultures,
in­

stead of hiding them in the earth, or consuming them with fire. Their repent­

ance was expressed by a precipitate return, and they loudly declared, that
they

had rather die on the borders of the empire, than enjoy the wealth and favour
of

the barbarian. From this journey, however, they derived a benefit which
reflects

the purest lustre on the character of Chosroes. He required, that the seven
sages,

who had visited the court of Persia, should be exempted from the penal laws
which

Justinian enacted against his pagan subjects; and this privilege expressly
stipulated

in a treaty of peace, was guarded by the vigilance of a powerful mediator. (3)
Sim­

plicius and his companions ended their lives in peace and obscurity: and as
they

left no disciples, they terminated the long list of Grecian philosophers, who
may

be justly praised, notwithstanding their defects, as the wisest and most
virtuous of

their cotemporaries. The writings of Simplicius are now extant. His physical

and metaphysical commentaries on Aristotle have passed away with the fashion

of the times; but his moral interpretation of Epictetus is preserved in the
library

of nations, as a classic book, most excellently adapted to direct the will, to
purify

the heart, and confirm the understanding, by a just confidence in the nature
both

of God and man.

About the same time that Pythagoras first invented the appellation
philosopher,

liberty and the consulship were founded at Rome by the elder Brutus. The revo­

lutions of the consular office, which may be viewed in the successive lights
of a

substance, a shadow, and a name, have been occasionally mentioned in the
present

history. The first magistrates of the republic had been chosen by the people,
to

exercise, in the senate, and in the camp, the powers of peace and war, which
were

afterwards translated to the emperors. But the tradition of ancient dignity
was

long revered by the Romans and barbarians. A Gothic historian applauds the

consulship of Theodoric as the height of all temporal glory and greatness;(4)
the

king of Italy himself congratulates those annual favourites of fortune, who,
with­

out the cares, enjoyed the splendour of the throne; and at the end of a
thousand

years, two consuls were created by the sovereigns of Rome and Constantinople,

(1) The life of Isidore was composed by Damascius (spud Pholiunt, Cod. 242. p.
1028—1076.) See the last

age of the pagan philosophers in Bracker (torn. ii. p. 341—351.)

(2) The suppression or the schools at Athens is recorded by John Malala (tool.
ii. p. 187. lur Decio Cos. Sol.,)

anil an anonymous Chronicle in the Vatican library (apud Aleman. p. 106.)

(3) Agathias (lib. ii. p. 69—71,) relates this curions story. Chosroes
ascended the throne in the year 531, and

made his first peace with the Romans in the beginning of 533, a date most
compatible with bis young fame and

old age of Isidore. ( Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. iii. p. 404. Pagi, torn.
ii. p. 543. 050.)

(4) Cauiodor. Vanarura Epist. yi. p. 1. Jornandes, civil, p. 690. edit. Grot.
Quod sumraum bonuro pri*

morna,ue in mundo decus edicitur.

Vol. III. 5

