' OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 89

thousand years by Shah Abbas, the wisest and most powerful of his successors.
(1)

His ambition was fired by the hope of launching a Persian navy from the
Phasis,

of commanding the trade and navigation of the Euxine sea, of desolating the

coast of Pontus and Bithynia, of distressing, perhaps of attacking,
Constantinople,

and of persuading the barbarians of Europe to second his arms and counsels
against

the common enemy of mankind. Under the pretence of a Scythian war, he si­

lently led his troops to the frontiers of Iberia; the Colchian guides were
prepared

to conduct them through the woods and along the precipices of mount Caucasus;

and a narrow path was laboriously formed into a safe and spacious highway, for

the march of cavalry, and even of elephants. Gubazes laid his person and dia­

dem at the feet of the king of Persia; his Colchians imitated the submission
of

their prince: and after the walls of Petra had been shaken, the Roman garrison

prevented, by a capitulation, the impending fury of the last assault. But the
Lazi

soon discovered, that their impatience had urged them to choose an evil more
in­

tolerable than the calamities which they strove to eacape. The monopoly of
salt

and corn was effectually removed by the loss of those valuable commodities.
The

authority of a Roman legislator was succeeded by the pride of an oriental
despot,

who beheld with equal disdain, the slaves whom he had exalted, and the kings

■whom he had humbled before the footstool of his throne. The adoration of fire

■was introduced into Colchos by the zeal of the Magi: their intolerant spirit
pro­

voked the fervour of a Christian people; and the prejudice of nature or
education

was wounded by the impious practice of exposing the dead bodies of their
parents,

on the summit of a lofty tower, to the crows and vultures of the air. (2) Con­

scious of the increasing hatred, which retarded the execution of his designs,
the

just Nushirvan had secretly given orders to assassinate the king of the Lazi,
to

transplant the people into some distant land, and to fix a faithful and
warlike colo­

ny on the banks of the Phasis. The watchful jealousy of the Colchians foresaw

and averted the approaching ruin. Their repentance was accepted at Constanti­

nople by the prudence, rather than the clemency, of Justinian; and he
commanded

Dagisteus with seven thousand Romans, and one thousand of the Zani, to expel

the Persians from the coast of the Euxine.

siege of Petra, which the Roman general, with the aid of the Lazi, imme-

undertook, is one of the most remarkable actions of the age. The city was

on a craggy rock, which hung over the sea, and communicated by a steep

and narrow path with the land. Since the approach was difficult, the attack
might

be deemed impossible; the Persian conqueror had strengthened the
fortifications

of Justinian; and the places least inaccessible were covered by additional
bulwarks.

In this important fortress, the vigilance of Chosroes had deposited a magazine
of

offensive and defensive arms, sufficient for five times the number, not only
of the

garrison, but of the besiegers themselves. The stock of flour and salt
provisions

■was adequate to the consumption of five years; the want of wine was supplied
by

vinegar, and of grain, from whence a strong liquor was extracted; and a triple

aqueduct eluded the diligence, and even the suspicions, of the enemy. But the

firmest defence of Petra was placed in the valour of fifteen hundred Persians,
who

resisted the assaults of the Romans, whilst in a softer vein of earth a mine
was se­

cretly perforated. The wall, supported by slender and temporary props, hung

tottering in the air; but Dagisteus delayed the attack till he had secured a
specific

recompense; and the town was relieved before the return of his messenger from

Constantinople. The Persian garrison was reduced to four hundred men, of whom

no more than fifty were exempt from sickness or wounds; yet such had been
their

inflexible perseverance, that they concealed their losses from the enemy, by
en­

during, without a murmur, the sight and putrifying stench of the dead bodies
of

their eleven hundred companions. After their deliverance, the breaches were

hastily stopped with sand-bags; the mine was replenished with earth; a new
wall

was erected on a frame of substantial timber; and a fresh garrison of three
thou­

sand men was stationed at Petra, to sustain the labours of a second siege. The
ope-

(1) See the amusing letters of Pietro della Valle.the Roman traveller (Viagsi,
torn. ii. p. 207.209.213.215.

266.286.300. torn.iii. p.54. 127.) In tbe year 1611,1619, and 1620, he
conversed with Shah Abbas, and

strongly encouraged a design which might have united Persia and Europe against
their common enemy the

Turk.

(2) See Herodotus (lib. i. c.140. p. 69.,) who speaks with diffidence; Larcher
(torn. i.p. 399—401. Notes sur

Herodote:) Procopius (Persic lib. i. c. 11..) ami Airathias(lib.ii. p. 61,
62.) This practice,agreeableto the Zen-

rlavesta (Hyde, de Relig. Pers. c. xxxiv. p. 414—421.,) demonstrates that the
burial of the Persian kings (Xeno-

phon. Cyropsed. lib. viii. p. 658.,) t. yxp toutou ftMu^tarsfan rou ttj
/jtttfuvxiyii a Greek fiction, and that their

tombs could be no more than cenotaphs.

Vol. III. 12

