OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 391

rnay hope to meet in the bosom of Abraham: but the complaint, that three
bishops

could no longer be found to consecrate a brother, announces the speedy and
inevit­

able ruin of the episcopal order. The Christians of Africa and Spain had long

since submitted to the practice of circumcision and the legal abstinence from
wine

and pork; and the name of Mazarabes(l) (adoptive Arabs) was applied to their

civil or religious conformity. (2) About the middle of the twelfth century,
the

worship of Christ and the succession of pastors were abolished along the coast
of

Barbary, and in the kingdoms of Cordova and Seville, of Valentia and Grenada.
(3)

The throne of the Almohades, or unitarians, was founded on the blindest
fanati­

cism, and their extraordinary rigour might be provoked or justified by the
recent

victories and intolerant zeal of the princess of Sicily and Castille, of
Arragon and

Portugal. The faith of the Mozarabes was occasionally revived by the papal
mis­

sionaries; and on the landing of Charles V. some families of Latin Christians
were

encouraged to rear their heads at Tunis and Algiers. But the seed of the
gospel

was quickly eradicated, and the long province from Tripoli to the Atlantic has

lost all memory of the language and religion of Rome. (4)

After the revolution of eleven centuries, the Jews and Christians of the
Turkish

empire enjoy the liberty of conscience which was granted by the Arabian
caliphs.

During the first age of the conquest, they suspected the loyalty of the
catholics,

whose name of Melchites betrayed their secret attachment to the Greek emperor,

while the Nestorians and Jacobites, his inveterate enemies, approved
themselves

the sincere and voluntary friends of the Mahometan government. (5) Yet this
par­

tial jealousy was healed by time and submission; the churches of Egypt were

shared with the catholics,(6) and all the oriental sects were included in the
com­

mon benefits of toleration. The rank, the immunities, the domestic
jurisdiction, of

the patriarchs, the bishops and the clergy, were protected by the civil
magistrate:

the learning of individuals recommended them to the employments of secretaries

and physicians; and they were enriched by the lucrative collection of the
revenue;

and their merit was sometimes raised to the command of cities and provinces. A

caliph of the house of Abbas was heard to declare, that the Christians were
most

worthy of trust in the administration of Persia. " The Moslems," said he, "
will

abuse their present fortune; the Magians regret their fallen greatness; and
the Jews

are impatient for their approaching(7) deliverance." But the slaves of
despotism

are exposed to the alternatives of favour and disgrace. The captive churches
of

the east have been afflicted in every age by the avarice or bigotry of their
rulers:

and the ordinary and legal restraints must be offensive to the pride or the
zeal of

the Christians. (8) About two hundred year&ftfter Mahomet, they were separated

from their fellow-subjects by a turban or girdle of a less honourable colour;
instead

of horses or mules, they were condemned to ride on asses, in the attitude of
wo­

men. Their public and private buildings were measured by a diminutive
standard;

(1) Mozarabes, or Mottarabet, adtcltUii, as it is interpreted in Latin.
(Pocock, Specimen Hist. Arabum. p.

39,40. Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. ii. p. 18.) The Mozarabic liturgy, the
ancient ritual of the church of

Toledo, has been attacked by the popes and exposed to the doubtful trials of
the sword and of fire. (Marian.

Hist. Hispan. torn. i. lib. ix. c. 18. p. 378.) It was, or rather it is, in
the Latin tongue; yet in the eleventh cen­

tury it was found necessary (A. j£. C. 1687. A. D. 1039.) to transcribe an
Arabic version of the canons of the

councils of Spain, (Bibliot. Arab. Hist. torn. i. p. 547.) for the use of the
bishops and clergy in the Moorish

kingdoms.

(2) About the middle of the tenth century, the clergy of Cordova was
reproached with this criminal compli­

ance, by the intrepid envoy of the emperor Otho L (Vit. Johan. Gorz, in Secul.
Benedict V. no. 115. apud

Fleury; Hist. Eccles. torn. xii. p. 91.)

(3) Pagi, Critica, torn. iv. A. D. 1149, no. 8,9. He justly observes, that
when Seville, &c. were retaken by

Ferdinand of Castille, no Christians, except captives, were found in the
place; and that the Mozarabic churches

of Africa and Spain, described by James a Vitnaco, A. D. 1218, (Hist.
Hierosol. c. 80. p. 1095. in Gest. Dei per

Francos) are copied from some older book. I shall add, that the date of the
Hegira 677, (A. 1278.) must apply

to the copy, not to the composition, of a treatise ol'jurisprudence, which
states the civil rights of the Christians

of Cordova; (Bibliot. Arab. Hist. torn. i. p. 471.) and that the Jews were the
only dissenters whom Abul Wa­

led, king of Grenada, (A. D. 1313.) could either discountenance or tolerate,
(torn. ii. p. 288.)

(4) Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 283. Leo Africanus would have
flattered his Roman masters, could

be have discovered any latent relics of the Christianity of Africa.

(5) Absit (said the catholic to the vizier of Bagdad,) lit pari loco habeas
Nestorianos, quorum prseter Arabas

nullus alius rex est, et Grace* quorom reges amovendo Aribibus bellonon
desistunt, Sec. Sec in the collec­

tions of Assemannus, (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 94—101.) the s'ate of the
Nestorians under the caliphs. That

of the Jacobites is more concisely exposed in the Preliminary Dissertation ol
the second volume of Assemannus.

(6) Eutych. Annal. torn. ii. 584. 3S7, 388. Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex.
p. 205,206. 257. 332. A taint of

the Monothelite heresy might render the first of these Greek patriarchs less
loyal to the emperors and less ob­

noxious to the Arabs.

(7) Motadhed, who reigned from A. D. 892 to 902. The Magians still held their
name and rank among the

religions of the empire. (Assemanni, Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 97.)

(8) Reland explains the general restraints of the Mahometan policy and
jurisprudence. (Dissertat. torn, iii-

p. 16—20.) The oppressive edicts of the caliph Motawakkel, (A. D. 847—861.)
which are still in force, are no­

ticed by Eutychius, (Annal. torn. ii. p. 448.) and d'Herbelot. (Bibliot.
Orient, p. 640.) A persecution of the ca­

liph Omar II. is related, and most probably magnified, by the Greek
Theophanes,(Chron. p. 334.)

