OF THE ROMAN. EMPIRE.

rant than the greater part of his cotemporaries in church and state; that his
edu­

cation had been directed by the learned Photius; and that several books of
profane

and ecclesiastical science were composed by the pen, or in the name, of the
im­

perial fihilosofiher. But the reputation of his philosophy and religion was
over­

thrown by a domestic vice, the reputation of his nuptials. The primitive ideas
of

the merit and holiness of celibacy were preached by the monks and entertained

by the Greeks, Marriage was allowed as a necessary means for the propagation

of mankind: after the death of either party, the survivor might satisfy, by a
se­

cond union, the weakness or the strength of the flesh; but a third marriage
was

censured as a state of legal fornication; and a fourth was a sin or scandal
yet un­

known to the Christians of the east. In the beginning of his reign, Leo
himself

had abolished the state of concubines, and condemned without annulling, third

marriages; but his patriotism and love soon compelled him to violate his own
laws,

and to incur the penance, which in a similar case he had imposed on his
subjects.

In his three first alliances, his nuptial bed was unfruitful; the emperor
required a

female companion: and the empire a legitimate heir. The beautiful Zoe was in­

troduced into the palace as a concubine; and after a trial of her fecundity,
and the

birth of Constantine, her lover declared his intention of legitimating the
mother

and the child, by the celebration of his fourth nuptials. But the patriarch
Nicho­

las refused his blessing: the imperial baptism of the young prince was
obtained by

a promise of separation; and the contumacious husband of Zoe was excluded from

the communion of the faithful. Neither the fear of exile, nor the desertion of
his

brethren, nor the authority of the Latin church, nor the danger of failure or
doubt

in the succession to the empire, could bend the spirit of the inflexible monk.
Af­

ter the death of Leo, he was recalled from exile to the civil and
ecclesiastical ad­

ministration; and the edict of union which was promulgated in the name of Con­

stantine, condemned the future scandal of fourth marriages, and left a tacit
impu­

tation on his own birth.

In the Greek language fiurfile and fiorfihyry are the same word: and as the
co­

lours of nature are invariable, we may learn, that a dark deep red was the
Tyrian

dye which stained the purple of the ancients. An apartment of the Byzantine

palace was lined with porphyry: it. was reserved for the use of the pregnant
em­

presses; and the royal birth of their children was expressed by the
appellation of

porfihyrogenite, or born in the purple. Several of the Roman princes had been

blessed with an heir; but this peculiar surname was first applied to
Constantine VEL

His life and titular reign were of equal duration; but of fifty-four years,
six had

elapsed before his father's death; and the son of Leo was ever the voluntary
or

reluctant subject of those who oppressed his weakness or abused his
confidence.

His uncle Alexander, who had long been invested with the title of Augustus,
was

the first colleague and governor of the young prince: but in a rapid career of
vice

and folly, the brother of Leo already emulated the reputation of Michael; and

when he was extinguished by a timely death, he entertained a project of
castrating

his nephew, and leaving the empire to a worthless favourite. The succeeding

years of the minority of Constantine were occupied by his mother Zoe, and a
suc­

cession of councils of seven regents, who pursued their interest, gratified
their pas­

sions, abandoned the republic, supplanted each other, and finally vanished hr
the

{wesence of a soldier. From an obscure origin, Romanus Lecapenus had raised

limself to the command of the naval armies; and in the anarchy of the times,
had

deserved, or at least had obtained, the national esteem. With a victorious and
af­

fectionate fleet, he sailed from the mouth of the Danube into the harbour of
Con­

stantinople, and was hailed as the deliverer of the people, and the guardian
of the

prince. His supreme office was at first defined by the new appellation of
father

of the emperor; but Romanus soon disdained the subordinate powers of a
minister,

and assumed, with the titles of Gsesar and Augustus, the full independence of
roy­

alty, which he held near five-and-twenty years. His three sons, Christopher,

Stephen, and Constantine, were successively adorned with the same honours, and

the lawful emperor was degraded from the first to the fifth rank in this
college of

princes. Yet, in the preservation of his life-and crown, he might still
applaud his

own fortune and the clemency of the usurper. The examples of ancient and
modern

history would have excused the ambition of Romanus: the powers and the laws of

the empire were in his hand; the spurious birth of Constantine would have
justi­

fied his exclusion; and the grave or the monastery was open to receive the son
of

the concubine. But Lecapenus does not appear to have possessed either the
virtues

or the vices of a tyrant. The spirit and activity of his private life
dissolved away

