2h THE DECLINE AND FALL

hardships and accidents of these reiterated journeys. Yet his mind was still
inde­

pendent and erect; the president of Thebais was awed by his pastoral letters;
he

survived the catholic tyrant of Alexandria, and after sixteen years'
banishment,

the synod of Chalcedon would perhaps have restored him to the honours, or at

least to the communion of the church. The death of Nestorius prevented his
obe­

dience to their welcome summons;(l) and his disease might afford some colour
to

the scandalous report, that his tongue, the organ of blasphemy, had been eaten
by

the worms. He was buried in a city of Upper Egypt, known by the names of

Chemnis, or Panapolis, or Akmin;(2) but the immortal malice of the Jacobites
has

persevered for ages to cast stones against his sepulchre, and to propagate the
fool­

ish tradition, that it was never watered by the rain of heaven, which equally
de­

scends on the righteous and the ungodly. (3) Humanity may drop a tear on the

fate of Nestorius; yet justice must observe, that he suffered the persecution
which

he had approved and inflicted. (4)

The death of the Alexandrian primate, after a reign of thirty-two years, aban­

doned the catholics to the intemperance of zeal, and the abuse of victory. (5)
The

Monofihysite doctrine (one incarnate nature) was rigorously preached in the

churches of Egypt and the monasteries of the east; the primitive creed of
Apolli-

naris was protected by the sanctity of Cyril; and the name of Eutyches, his
venera­

ble friend, has been applied to the sect most adverse to the Syrian heresy of
Nesto­

rius. His rival Eutyches was the abbot, or archimandrite, or superior of three
hun­

dred monks: but the opinions of a simple and illiterate recluse might have
expired

in the cell where he had slept above seventy years, if the resentment or
indiscre­

tion of Flavian, the Byzantine pontiff, had not exposed the scandal to the
eyes of

the Christian world. His domestic synod was instantly convened, their proceed­

ings were sullied with clamour and artifice, and the aged heretic was
surprised

into a seeming confession, that Christ had not derived his body from the
substance

of the Virgin Mary. From their partial decree Eutyches appealed to a general

council: and his cause was vigorously asserted by his godson Chrysaphius, the

reigning eunuch of the palace, and his accomplice Dioscorus who had succeeded
to

the throne, the creed, the talents, and the vices, of the nephew of
Theophilus.

By the special summons of Theodosius, the second synod of Ephesus was
judiciously

composed of ton metropolitans and ten bishops from each of the six diocesses
of the

eastern empire: some exceptions of favour or merit enlarged the number to one

hundred and thirty-five; and the Syrian Barsumas, as the chief and
representative

of the monks, was invited to sit and vote with the successors of the apostles.
But

the despotism of the Alexandrian patriarch again oppressed the freedom of de­

bate: the same spiritual and carnal weapons were again drawn from the arsenals

of Egypt; the Asiatic veterans, a band of archers, served under the orders of

Dioscorus: and the more formidable monks, whose minds were inaccessible to
rea­

son or mercy, besieged the doors of the cathedral. The general, and, as it
should

seem, the unconstrained voice of the fathers, accepted the faith arid even the
ana­

themas of Cyril; and the heresy of the two natures was formally condemned in

the persons and writings of the most learned orientals. " May those who divide

Christ be divided with the sword; may they be hewn in pieces, may they be
burnt

alive!" were the charitable wishes of a Christian synod.(6) The innocence and

sanctity of Eutyches were acknowledged without hesitation: but the prelates,

(1) The invitation of Kestorian to the synod of Chalcedon, is related by
Zacharius, bishop of Melitene. (Eva-

grius, lib. ii. c. 2. Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 55.) and the
famous Xenaias or Fhiloxenus, bishop of

Hierapolis, (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 40, Sec.) denied by
Evagrius and Asseman, and stoutly main­

tained by La Croze. (Thesaur. Epistol. torn. iti. p. 181, &c.) The fact is not
improbable! yet it was the inte­

rest of the Monophysites to spread the invidious report; and Entychius, torn.
ii. p. 12. affirms, that Nestorius

died after an exile of seven years, and consequently ten years before the
synod of Chalcedon.

(2) Consult d'Anville, Memoire sur 1'Egypte, p. 191.) Pocock, (Description of
the East, vol. i. p. 76.) Abul-

feda, (Descript. Egypt, p. 14.) and his commentator Michaelis, (Not. p. 78
—83.) and the Nubian Geographer,

(p. 42.) who mentions, in the twelfth century, the ruins and the sujrat.-canes
of Akmin.

(3) Entychius, (Annal. torn. ii. p. 12.) and Gregory Bar-Hebrteus, of
Abulpharagius Asseman. tem. ii. p.

S16.) represent the credulity of the tenth and thirteenth centuries.

(4) We are obliged to Evagrius (lib. i. c. 7.) for some extracts from the
letters of Nestorius; but the lively

picture of his surTerings is treated with insult by the hard and stupid
fanatic.

(5) Dili Cyrillum dum viveret, auctoritate sua effecuse, ne Entychianismus et
Monophy sitamm error in

nervum erumperet: idque verum pufo . ,. aliquo . . . honesto modo stzxitoJuw
cecinrrat. The learned

but cautious Jablomki did not always speak the whole truth. Cum Cyrillo lenius
omnino egi, quam si tecum

■aut CHm aliis rei hujus probe gnaris et acquis rerum aestimatorbus sermones
privatos conferrem, Thesaur. Epis­

tol. La Crozian, torn, i p. 107,198.) an excellent key to bis dissertations on
the Nerftorian controversy!

(6) H «y* cvvooos ttjrtv apov, Kxtxrov EuriStor, ours; £wv xai| owto; ii( Sua
j-tvurai w; tfupttrt fafWrSti., . si tic MJr? 1

Juo aKtSiaia. At the request of Dioscorus, those who were not able
toroar(>3i»i<reii,)stretehed out their bands.

At Chalcedon, the orientals disclaimed these acclamations ; but the Egyptians
more consistently declared

cwra ui, t»ts ii>r»;«i» KM wv Ufojuv. (Concil.tpm. iv.p. 1012.)

