OF THE ROMAN EMfilRE. X 37

rcrs, from Maurice to Alexius, Basil the Macedonian has alone been the theme
of

a separate work; and the absence, or loss, or imperfection, of cotemporary
evi­

dence, must be poorly supplied by the doubtful authority of more recent
compilers.

The four last centuries are exempt from the reproach of penury: and with the

the Comnenian family, the historic muse of Constantinople again revives, but

her apparel is gaudy; her motions are without elegance or grace. A'succession
of

priests, or courtiers, treads in each other's footsteps in the same path of
servitude

and superstition; their views are narrow, their judgment is feeble, or
corrupt: and

we close the volume of copious barrenness, still ignomnt of the causes of
events,

the characters of the actors, and the manners of the times, which they
celebrate

or deplore. The observation which has been applied to a man, may be extended

to a whole people, that the energy of the sword is communicated to the pen:
and

it will be found by experience that the tone of history will rise or fall with
the

spirit of the age.

From these considerations, I should have abandoned without regret the Greek

slaves and their servile historians, had I not reflected that the fate of the
Byzan­

tine monarchy is passively -connected with the most splendid and important
revo­

lutions which have changed the state of the world. The space of the lost pro­

vinces was immediately replenished with new colonies and rising kingdoms: the

active virtues of peace and war deserted from the vanquished to the victorious

nations; and it is in their origin and conquests, in their religion and
government,

that we must explore the causes and effects of the decline and fall of the
eastern

empire. Nor will this scope of narrative, the riches and variety of these
mate­

rials, be incompatible with the unity of design and composition. As, in his
daily

prayers, the Mussulman of Fez or Delhi still turns his face towards the temple
of

Mecca, the historian's eye shall be always fixed on the city of
Constantinople.

The excursive line may embrace the wilds of Arabia and Tartary, but the circle

will be ultimately reduced to the decreasing limit of the Roman monarchy.

On this principle I shall establish the plan of the two last volumes of the
pre­

sent work. The first chapter will contain, in a regular series, the emperors
who

reigned at Constantinople during a period of six hundred years, from the days

of Heraclius to the Latin conquest: a rapid abstract, which may be supported
by

a general appeal to the order and text of the original historians. In this
introduc­

tion L shall confine myself to the revolutions of the throne, the succession
of fami­

lies, the personal characters of the Greek princes, the mode of their life and

death, the maxims and influence of their domestic governments, and the
tendency

of their reign to accelerate or suspend the downfal of the eastern empire.
Such

a chronological review will serve to illustrate the various arguments of the
subse­

quent chapters; and each circumstance of the eventful story of the barbarians
will

adapt itself in a proper place to the Byzantine annals. The internal state of
the

empire, and the dangerous heresy of the Paulicians, which shook the east and
en­

lightened the west, will be the subject of two separate chapters; but these
inqui­

ries must be postponed till our farther progress shall have opened the view Of
the

world in the ninth and tenth centuries of the Christian era. After this
foundation

of Byzantine history, the following nations will pass before our eyes, and
each will

occupy the space to which it may be entitled by greatness or merit, or the
degree

of connexion with the Roman world and the present age. I. The Franks; a ge­

neral appellation which includes all the barbarians of France, Italy, and Ger­

many, who were united by the sword and sceptre of Charlemagne. The perse­

cution of images and their votaries, separated Rome and Italy from the
Byzantine

throne, and prepared the restoration of the Roman empire in the west. II. The

Arabs or Saracens. Three ample chapters will be devoted to this curious and

interesting object. In the first, after a picture of the country and its
inhabitants,

I shall investigate the character of Mahomet; the character, religion, and
success,

of the prophet. In the second, I shall lead the Arabs to the conquest of
Syria,

Egypt, and Africa, the provinces of the Roman empire; nor can I check their

victorious career till they have overthrown the monarchies of Persia and
Spain.

In the third, I shall inquire how Constantinople and Europe were saved by the

luxury and arts, the division and decay, of the empire of the caliphs. A
single

chapter will include, III. The Bulgarians, IV. Hungarians, and V. Rus­

sians, who assaulted bv sea or by land the provinces and the capital: but the
last of

these, so important in their present greatness, will excite some curiosity in
their

origin and infancy. VI. The Normans: or rather the private adventures of that

warlike people, who founded a powerful kingdom in Apulia and Sicily, shook the

