THE DECLINE AND FALL

widow of Alboin: her situation and her past conduct might justify the most
licen­

tious proposals; and she readily listened to the passion of a minister, who,
even

in the decline of the empire, was respected as the equal of kings. The death
of

a jealous lover was an easy and grateful sacrifice, and as Helmichis issued
from

the bath, he received the deadly potion from the hand of his mistress. The
taste

of the liquor, its speedy operation, and his experience of the character of
Rosa­

mond, convinced him that he was poisoned: he pointed his dagger to her breast,

compelled her to drain the remainder of the cup, and expired in a few minutes,

with the consolation that she could not survive to enjoy the fruits of her
wicked­

ness. The daughter of Alboin anorRosamond, with the richest spoils of the Lom­

bards, was embarked for Constantinople; the surprising strength of Peredeus

amused and terrified the imperial court; his blindness and revenge exhibited
an

imperfect copy of the adventures of Samson. By the free suffrage of the
nation,

in the assembly of Pavia, Clepho, one of their noblest chiefs, was elected as
the

successor of Alboin. Before the end of eighteen months, the throne was
polluted

by a second murder; Clepho was stabbed by the hand of a domestic; the regal
of­

fice was suspended above ten years, during the minority of his son Authoris;
and

Italy was divided and oppressed by a ducal aristocracy of thirty tyrants.(l)

When the nephew of Justinian ascended the throne, he proclaimed a new era of

happiness and glory. The annals of a second Justin(2) are marked with disgrace

abroad and misery at home. In the west the Roman empire was afflicted by the

loss of Italy, the desolation of Africa, and the conquest of the Persians.
Injus­

tice prevailed both in the capital and the provinces; the rich trembled for
their

property, the poor for their safety, the ordinary magistrates were ignorant or
ve­

nal, the occasional remedies appear to have been arbitrary and violent, and
the

complaints of the people could no longer be silenced by the splendid names of
a

legislator and a conqueror. The opinion which imputes to the prince all the
ca­

lamities of his times, may be countenanced by the historian as a serious truth
era

salutary prejudice. Yet a candid suspicion will arise, that the sentiments of
Jus­

tin were pure and benevolent, and that he might have filled his station
without

reproach, if the faculties of his mind had not been impaired by disease, which
de­

prived the emperor of the use of his feet, and confined him to the palace, a
stran­

ger to the complaints of the people and the vices of the government. The tardy

knowledge of his own impotence determined him to lay down the weight of the
dia­

dem; and in the choice of a worthy substitute, he showed some symptoms of a
dis­

cerning and even magnanimous spirit. The only son of Justin and Sophia died in
his

infancy: their daughter Arabia was the wife of Baduarius,(3) superintendant of

the palace, and afterwards commander of the Italian armies, who vainly aspired

to confirm the rights of marriage by those of adoption. While the empire ap­

peared an object of desire, Justin was accustomed to behold with jealousy and
ha­

tred his brothers and cousins, the rivals of his hopes; nor could he depend on
the

gratitude of those who would accept the purple as a restitution, rather than a
gift.

Of these competitors, one had been removed by exile, and afterwards by death;

and the emperor himself had inflicted such cruel insults on another, that he
must

either dread his resentment or despise his patience. This domestic animosity
was

refined into a generous resolution of seeking a successor, not in his family,
but in

the republic: and the artful Sophia recommended Tiberius,(4) his faithful cap­

tain of the guards, whose virtues and fortune the emperor might cherish as the

fruit of his judicious choice. The ceremony of his elevation to the rank of
Cxsar

or Augustus, was performed in the portico of the palace, in the presence of
the

patriarch and the senate. Justin collected the remaining strength of his mind
and

n) See the history of Paul, lib. ii. e, 28—32. I have horrowed some
interesting circumstance! from the

Liber Fontificalis of Agnellus, in Script. Her. Ital. tom.ii. p. 124. Of all
Chronological guides, Muratori is

the safest.

(2) The original authors for the reign of Justin the Younger, are Evagrius,
Hist. Eccles. lilj. v. c. 1—

12. Theophanes, in Chronograph, p. 204—210. Zonaras, torn. ii. lib. 14. p.
70—72. Cedrcnu9, in Compend. p.

588—392.

(3) Dispositorque novus sacra* Baduarius aula.

Successor soceri mox factus Cura palati. Corippus.

Baduarius is enumerated among the descendants and allies of the house of
Justinian. A family of noble Ve­

netians (Casa Badoero) built churches and gave dukes to the republic as early
as the nintb century; and if

their descent be admitted, no kings in Europe can produce a pedigree so
ancient and illustrious. Ducange,

Faro. Byzantin. p. 09. Ame'ot de la Houssaye, Gouveineiuent de Venise, torn,
ii; p. 5S5.

(4) The praise bestowed on princes before their elevation, is the purest and
most weighty. Corippus bus

celebrated Tiberius at the time of the accession of Justin, 'lib. i. 212—232.)
Yet even a captain of the guards

might attract the tottery of an African exile.

