OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 35?

In his palace of Constantinople or Antioch, he was awakened by the invasion of

Syria, the loss of Bosra, and the danger of Damascus. An army of seventy thou­

sand veterans, or new levies, was assembled at Hems, or Emesa, under the com­

mand 'of his general Werdan;(l) and these troops, consisting chiefly of
cavalry,

might be indifferently styled either Syrians, or Greeks, or Romans: Syrians,
from

the place of their birth or warfare; Greeks, from the religion and language of

their sovereign; and Romans, from the proud appellation which was still
profaned

by the successors of Constantine. ' On the plain of Aiznadin, as Wajran rode

on a white mule decorated with gold chains, and surrounded with<^nens and

standards, ft% was surprised by the near approach of a fierce and naked-
warrior,

who had undertaken to view the state of the enemy. The adventurous valour of

Derar was inspired, and has perhaps been adorned, by the enthusiasm of his age

and country. The hatred of the Christians, the love of spoil, and the contempt

of danger, were the ruling passions of the audacious Saracen; and the prospect
of

instant death could never shake his religious confidence; or ruffle the
calmness of

his resolution, or even suspend the frank and martial pleasantry of his
humour.

In the most hopeless enterprise, he was bold, and prudent, and fortunate:
after in­

numerable hazards, after being thrice a prisoner in the hands of the infidels,
he

still survived to relate the achievements, and to enjoy the rewards, of the
Sy­

rian conquest. On this occasion, his single lance maintained a flying fight
against

thirty Romans, who were detached by Werdan; and after killing or unhorsing se­

venteen of their number, Derar returned in safety to his applauding brethren.

When his rashness was mildly censured by the general, he excused himself with

the simplicity of a soldier. " Nay," said Derar, " I did not begin first: but
they

came out to take me, and I was afraid that God should see me turn my back: and

indeed I fought in good earnest, and without doubt God assisted me against
them;

and had I not been apprehensive of disobeying your orders, I should not have

come away as I did; and I perceive already that they will fall into our
hands." In

the presence of both armies, a venerable Greek advanced from the ranks with a

liberal offer of peace; and the departure of the Saracens would have been pur­

chased by a gift to each soldier of a turban, a robe, and a piece of gold; ten
robes,

and a hundred pieces to their leader; one hundred robes, and a thousand pieces
to

the caliph. A smile of indignation expressed the refusal of Caled. " Ye Chris­

tian dogs, you know your option: the Koran,' the tribute, or the sword. We are

a people whose delight is in war, rather than in peace; and we despise your
pitiful

alms, since we shall speedily be masters of your wealth, your families, and
your

persons." Notwithstanding this apparent disdain, he was deeply conscious of
the

public danger: those who had been in Persia, and had seen the armies of
Chosroes,

confessed that they never beheld a more formidable array. From the superiority

of the enemy, the artful Saracen derived a fresh incentive of courage. " You
see

before you," said he, '* the united force of the Romans: you cannot hope to
escape,

but you may conquer Syria in a single day. The event depends on your
discipline

and patience. Reserve yourselves till the evening. It was in the evening that
the

prophet was accustomed to vanquish." During two successive engagements, his

temperate firmness sustained the darts of the enemy, and the murmurs of his

troops. At length, when the spirits and quivers of the adverse line were
almost

exhausted, Caled gave the signal of onset and victory. The remains of the im­

perial army fled to Antioch, or Ciesarea, or Damascus; and the death of four
hun­

dred and seventy Moslems, was compensated by the opinion that they had sent to

hell above fifty thousand of the infidels. The spoil was inestimable; many
ban­

ners and crosses of gold and silver, precious stones, silver and gold chains,
and in­

numerable suits of the richest armour and apparel. The general distribution

was postponed till Damascus should be taken: but the seasonable supply of arms

became the instrument of new victories. The glorious intelligence was
transmit­

ted to the throne of the caliph, and the Arabian tribes the coldest or most
hostile

to the prophet's mission, were eager and importunate to share the harvest of

Syria.

The sad tidings were carried to Damascus by the speed of grief and terror; and

the inhabitants beheld from their walls the return of the heroes of Aiznadin.
Am-

(1) The name of Werdan is unknown to Theoplianes, and though it might belong
to an Armenian chief,

iias very little of a Greek aspect or sound. If the Byzantine historians have
mangled the oriental names, the

Arabs, in this instance, likewise have taken ample revenge on their enemies.
In transposing the Greek cha­

racter from right to left, might thev not produce, from the familiar
appellation of Andrea, something like the

smvgram Werdan-

