IIS THE DECLINE AND FALL

a sinner, ignorant of the limits of his own power: the second, in the midst of
four/

hundred thousand soldiers and eight thousand slaves, concealed from every
human;

eye the chamber where he attempted to sleep. Their sons were educated in the

vices of kings; and both Egypt and Syria were recovered and possessed by the
Ab­

bassides during an interval of thirty years. In the decline of their empire,
Me­

sopotamia, with the important cities of Mosul and Aleppo, was occupied by the

Arabian princes of the tribe of Hamadan. The poets of their court could
repeat,,

•without a blush, that nature had formed their countenances for beauty, their

tongues for eloquence, and their hands for liberality and valour: but the
genuine

tale of the elevation and reign of the Hamadanites exhibits a scene of
treachery,

murder and parricide. At the same fatal period, the Persian kingdom was again

usurped by the dynasty of the Bowides, by the sword of three brothers, who,
un­

der various names, were styled the support and columns of the state, and who,
from

the Caspian sea to the ocean, would suffer no tyrants but themselves. Under
their

reign, the language and genius of Persia revived, and the Arabs, three hundred

and four years after the death of Mahomet, were deprived of the sceptre of the

east.

Radhi, the twentieth of the Abbassides, and the thirty-ninth of the successors

of Mahomet, was the last who deserved the title of commander of the
faithful;(t)

the last (says Abulfeda) who spoke to the people, or conversed with the
learned;

the last who, in the expense of his household, represented the wealth and
magni­

ficence of the ancient caliphs. After him, the lords of the eastern world were
re­

duced to the most abject misery, and exposed to the blows and insults of a
servile

condition. The revolt of the provinces circumscribed their dominions within
the

walls of Bagdad; but that capital still contained an innumerable multitude,
vain of

their past fortune, discontented with their present state, and oppressed by
the de­

mands of a treasury, which had formerly been replenished by the spoil and tri­

bute of nations. Their idleness was exercised by faction and controversy.
Under

the mask of piety, the rigid followers of Hanbal(2) invaded the pleasures of
do­

mestic life, burst into the houses of plebeians and princes, spilled the wine,
broke

the instruments, beat the musicians, and dishonoured, with infamous
suspicions,

the associates of every handsome youth. In each profession, which allowed room

for two persons, the one was a votary, the other an antagonist, of Ali; and
the Ab­

bassides were awakened by the clamorous grief of the sectaries, who denied
their

title, and cursed their progenitors. A turbulent people could only be
repressed

by a military force; but who could satisfy the avarice, or assert the
discipline, of

the mercenaries themselves ? The African and the Turkish guards drew their

swords against each other, and the chief commanders, the emirs al Omra,(3) im­

prisoned or deposed their sovereigns, and violated the sanctuary of the mosch
and

haram. If the caliphs escaped to the camp or court of any neighbouring prince,

their deliverance was a change of servitude, till they were prompted by
despair

to invite the Bowides, the sultans of Persia, who silenced the factions of
Bagdad

by their irresistible arms. The civil and military powers were assumed by Moe-

zaldowlat, the second of the three brothers, and a stipend of sixty thousand
pounds

sterling was assigned by his generosity for the private expense of the
commander

of the faithful. But on the fortieth day, at the audience 'of the ambassadors
of

Chorasan, and in the presence of a trembling multitude, the caliph was dragged

from his throne to a dungeon, by the command of the stranger, and the rude

hands of his Dilemites. His palace was pillaged, his eyes were put out, and
the

mean ambition of Abbassides aspired to the vacant station of danger and
disgrace.

In the school of adversity, the luxurious caliphs resumed the grave and
abstemi­

ous virtues of the primitive times. Despoiled of their armour and silken
robes,

fl) Hie est ultimas chalifah qui multum atque csepius pro concione perorarit.
. .. Fuit etiam ultimas qai

olium cum eruditis et facetis hominibus fallere hilariterque agere soferet.
Ultimus tandem chalitarum cut

sumptus, 5tipendia,r('ditus, et thesauri, culina:, cseteraque omim aujica
pompa priorum chalifarura ad instar

comparata fuerint. _ Videbimos enim paullo poet quam indignis et servitibus
ludibriis exagitati, quam ad hu-

milcm fortunam ultimumque eontemptum abjecti fuerint hi quondam potentissimi
totius terrarum Orienta-

Kuinorbisdomini. Abulfed. Annal. Moslem, p. 261. I have given this passage at
the manner and tone of

Abulfeda; but the cast of Latiu eloquence belongs moreproperly to Reiske. The
Arabian historian (p. 255.

257.261—269.283, See.) bas supplied me with the most interesting facts of this
paragraph.

(2) Their master, on a similar occasion, showed himself of a more indulgent
and tolerating spirit. Ahmed

Ebn Hanbal, the head of one of the four orthodox sects, was born at Bagdad, A.
H. 164, anil died there A. H.

241. He fought and suffered in the dispute concerning the creation of the
Koran.

(3) The office of vizier was superseded by the emir alOmra Imperator
Imperatorum, a title first instituted

by Radhi, and which merged at length in the Bowides and Seljukides;
Tectigalibus. et tributis, et curiis per

©nines regiones prsefecit.jussitque in omnibus suggestis nominis ejus in
concionibus mentionenrfieri. (Abul-

liharagius,Dynait. p. 190.) It is likewise mentioned bv F.rmacin. (p.
254.255.)

