300 I HE DECLINE AND PALL

Ciesars was overthrown; and the invincible genius of liberty prevailed over
the

two Frederics, the greatest princes of the middle age: the first, superior
perhaps

in military prowess; the second, who undoubtedly excelled in the softer accom­

plishments of peace and learning.

Ambitious of restoring the honours of the purple, Frederic I. invaded the re­

publics of Lombardy, with the arts of a statesman, the valour of a soldier,
and the

crueltv of a tyrant. The recent discovery of the Pandects had renewed a
science

most favourable to despotism; and his venal advocates proclaimed the ttmperor
the

absolute master of the lives and properties of his subjects. His royal
prerogatives,

in a less odious sense, were acknowledged in the diet of Roncaglia; and the
revenue

of ^taly was fixed at thirty thousand pounds of silver,(l) which were
multiplied to

an indefinite demand, by the rapine of the fiscal officers. The obstinate
cities were

reduced by the terror or force of his arms; his captives were delivered to the
exe­

cutioner, or shot from his military engines; and, after the siege and
surrender of

Milan, the buildings of that stately capital were rased to the ground; three
hundred

hostages were sent into Germany, and the inhabitants were dispersed in four
vil­

lages, under the yoke of the inflexible conqueror. (2) But Milan soon rose
from

her ashes; and the league of Lombardy was cemented by distress: their cause
was

espoused by Venice, Pope Alexander III., and the Greek emperor: the fabric of

oppression was overturned in a day; and in the treaty of Constance, Frederic
sub­

scribed, with some reservations, the freedom of four-and-twenty cities. His
grand­

son contended with their vigour and maturity; but Frederic 11.(3) was endowed

with some personal and peculiar advantages. His birth and education recom­

mended him to the Italians; and in the implacable discord of the two factions,
the

Ghibelins were attached to the emperor, while the Guelfs displayed the banner
of

liberty and the church. The rourt of Rome had slumbered, when his father

Henry VI. was permitted to unite with the empire the kingdoms of Naples and

Sicily; and from these hereditary realms, the son derived an ample and ready

supply of troops and treasure. Yet Frederic II. was finally oppressed by the
arms

of the Lombards and the thunders of the Vatican; his kingdom was given to a

stranger, and the last of his family was beheaded at Naples on a public
scaffold.

During sixty years, no emperor appeared in Italy, and the name was remembered

only by the ignominious sale of the last relics of sovereignty.

The barbarian conquerors of the west were pleased to decorate their chief with

the title of emperor; but it was not their design to invest him with the
despotism

of Constantine and Justinian. The persons of the Germans were free, their con­

quests were their own, and their national character was animated by a spirit
which

scorned the servile jurisprudence of the new or the ancient Roman. It would
have

been a vain and dangerous attempt to impose a monarch on the armed freemen,

who were impatient of a magistrate; on the bold, who refused to obey; on the

powerful, who aspired to command. The empire of Charlemagne and Otho was

distributed among the dukes of the nations or provinces, the counts of the
smaller

districts, and the margraves of the marches or frontiers, who all united the
civil

and military authority as it had been delegated to the lieutenants of the
first Caesars.

The Roman governors, who, for the most part, were soldiers of fortune, seduced

their mercenary legions, assumed the imperial purple, and either failed or
suc­

ceeded in their revolt, without wounding the power and unity of government If

the dukes, margraves, and counts, of Germany were less audacious in
theirclaims,

the consequences of their success were more lasting and pernicious to the
state.

Instead of ainiing at the supreme rank, they silently laboured to establish
and ap­

propriate their provincial independence. Their ambition was seconded by the

weight of their estate's and vassals, their mutual example and support, the
common

interest of the subordinate nobility, the change of princes and families, the
minori­

ties of Otho III. and Henry IV., the ambition of the popes, and the vain
pursuits

of the fugitive crowns of Italy and Rome. All the attributes of regal and
territorial

jurisdiction were gradually usurped by the commanders of the provinces; the
right

of peace and war, of life and death, of coinage and taxation, of foreign
alliance and

domestic economy. Whatever had been seized by violence, was ratified by favour

(1) Gutither Lururinns, lib. viii. 584. et icq. apart. Schmidt, torn. iii. p.
359.

(2) Solus imperator feciemsuam tirmavit utpetntro. (Fucard. de F.xcidio
Mediolani, Script. Ital. torn. vi.

p. 917.) This volume,of Muratnri contains the originals of the history of
Frederic I. which must be compared

with due regard to the circumstances and prejudices of each German or Lombard
writer.

(3) For the history of Frederic II. and the house of Swabia at Naples, see
Giannone, Istoria Civile, torn. ii.

lib. xiv—ju j.

