OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

midable only as robbers; and in the proud security of peace, the
fortifications of

Syria were neglected on the most vulnerable side.

But the national enmity, at least the effects of that enmity, had been
suspended

by a truce, which continued above forescore years. An ambassador from the em­

peror Zeno accompanied the rash and unfortunate Perozes, in his expedition

against the Nepthalites or White Huns, whose conquest had been stretched from

the Caspian to the heart of India, whose throne was enriched with emeralds,(l)

and whose cavalry was supported by a line of two thousand elephants. (2) The

Persians were twice circumvented, in a situation which made valour useless and

flight impossible; and the double victory of the Huns was achieved by military

stratagem. They dismissed their royal captive after he had submitted to adore

the majesty of a barbarian: and the humiliation was poorly evaded by the
casnis-

/tical subtilty of the Magi, who instructed Perozes to direct his attention to
the

rising sun. The indignant successor of Cyrus forgot his danger and his
gratitude;

he renewed the attack with headstrong fury, and lost both his army and his
life. (3)

The death of Perozes abandoned Persia to her foreign and domestic enemies; and

twelve years of confusion elapsed before his son Cabades or Kobad could
embrace

any designs of ambition or revenge. The unkind parsimony of Anastasius was

the motive or pretence of a Roman war;(4) the Huns and Arabs marched under

the Persian standard, and the fortifications of Armenia and Mesopotamia were,
at

that time, in a ruinous or imperfect condition. The emperor returned his
thanks

to the governor and people of Matyropolis, for the ,prompt surrender of a city

which could not be successfully defended, and the conflragration of
Theodosopolis

might justify the conduct of their prudent neighbours. Amida sustained a long

and destructive siege: at the end of three months the loss of fifty thousand
of the

soldiers of Cabades was not balanced by any prospect of success, and it was in

vain that the Magi deduced a flattering prediction from the indecency of the
wo­

men on the ramparts, who had revealed their most secret charms to the eyes of

the assailants. At length, in a silent night, they ascended the most
accessible

tower which was guarded only by some monks, oppressed after the duties of the

festival, with sleep and wine. Scaling ladders were applied at the dawn of
day;

the presence of Cabades, his stern command, and his drawn sword, compelled

the Persians to vanquish; and before it was sheathed, fourscore thousand of
the

inhabitants had expiated the blood of their companions. After the siege of

Amida, the war continued three years, and the unhappy frontier tasted the full

measure of its calamities. The gold of Anastasius was offered too late, the
num­

ber of his troops was defeated by the number of their generals; the country
was

stripped of its inhabitants, and both the living and the dead were abandoned
to the

wild beasts of the desert. The resistance of Edessa, and the deficiency of
spoil,

inclined the mind of Cabades to peace; he sold his conquests for an exorbitant

price: and the same line, though marked with slaughter and devastation, still
se­

parated the two empires. To avert the repetition of the same evils, Anastasius

resolved to found a new colony, so strong, that it should defy the power of
the

Persian, so far advanced towards Assyria, that its stationary troops might
defend

the province by the menace or operation of an offensive war. For this purpose,
the

town of Dara,(5) fourteen miles from Nisibis, and four days'journey from the
Ti­

gris, was peopled ami adorned; the hasty works of Anastasius were improved by

the perseverance of Justinian; and without insisting on places less important,
the

fortifications of Dara may represent the military architecture of the age. The

city was surrounded with two walls, and the interval between them of fifty
paces,

(1) They were purchased from the merchants of AdnUa who traded to India
(Cosmas, Topograph. Christ,

lira. xi. p. 339.:^ yet, in the estimate of precious stones, the Scythian
emerald was the first, the Bacrrian the se­

cond, the Ethiopian only the third (Hill's Theophrastus, p. el, &c. 920 The
production, mines, &e. of eme­

ralds, are involved in darkness; and it is doubtful whether we possess any of
the twelve sorts known to the an­

cients (Goguet. Origine des Loix, See. part ii. lib. ii. c. 2. art. S.) In
this M-ar the Huns got, or at least Perozes

• loat, the finest pearl in the world, of which Procopius relates a ridiculous
fable.

(2) The Indo-Scythae continued to reign from the time of Augustus (Dionys.
Perieget. 1088. with the Com­

mentary of Eustatnius, in Hudson, Geograph. Minor, torn, iv.) to that of the
eldest .lustin. (Cosmas, Topo­

graph. Christ, lib. xi. p. 338,339.) On their origin and conquests, see
d'Amille (sur l'lnde, p. 18. 45, &e. 69.

85. 89.) In the second century they were masters of Larice or Guezerat.

(3) See the fate of Phirouz, or Perozes, and its consequences, in Proeopius,
(Persic, lib, i. c. 3—6.) who may

be compared with the fragments of oriental history (d'Herbelot, Bibliot.
Orient, p. 351. and Texeira, History

of Persia, translated or abridged by Stevens, lib. i. c. 32. p. 132—138.) The
chronology is ably ascertained by

Asseman. (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iii. p_. 396—427.)

(4) The Persian war, under the reigns of Anastasius and Justin, may be
collected from Procopius (Persic,

lib. i. c. 7—9.,) Theophanes (in Chronograph, p. 124—127.,) Evagrius (lib.
iii. c. 37.,) Marcellinus (m Chron. p.

47.,) and Josne Stylites (apud Asseman. torn. i. p. 272—281.)

(5) The description of Dara is atnply and correctly given by Procopius
(Persic, lib. i. c. 10. lib. ii. c. 13. De

Edefic. lib. ii.e. 1—3. lib. iii. c. 5.) See the situation in d'Anville
(PEnprateet le Tigre, p. 53—55.,) though he

seems to double the interval between Dara and Nisibis.

