OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

Ills life was prolonged to the age of one hundred and ten years, and he became
the

father of six daughters and thirteen sons. His best beloved, Abdullah, was the

most beautiful and modest of the Arabian youth; and in the first night, when
he con­

summated his marriage with Amina, of the noble race of theZahrites, two
hundred

virgins are said to have expired of jealousy and despair. Mahomet, or more
pro­

perly Mahommed, the only son of Abdallah and Amina, was born at Mecca, four

years after the death of Justinian, and two months after the defeat of the
Abys-

sinians.(l) whose victory would have introduced into the Caaba the religion of
the

Christians. In his early infancy, he was deprived of his father, his mother,
and

his grandfather; his uncles were strong and numerous; and in the division of
the

inheritance, the orphan's share was reduced to five camels and an Ethiopian
maid­

servant. At home and abroad, in peace and war, Abu Taleb, the most respecta­

ble of his uncles, was the guide and guardian of his youth; in his twenty-
fifth year,

he entered into the service of Cadijah, a rich and noble widow of Mecca, who
soon

rewarded his fidelity with the gift of her hand and fortune. The marriage-con­

tract, in the simple style of antiquity, recites the mutual loves of Mahomet
and

Cadijah; describes him'as the most accomplished of the tribe of Koreish; and

stipulates a dowry of twelve ounces of gold and twenty camels, which was sup­

plied by the liberality of his uncle. (2) By this alliance the son of Abdallah
was

restored to the station of his ancestors; and the judicious matron was content
with

his domestic virtues, till, in the fortieth year of his age, (3) he assumed
the title

of a prophet, and proclaimed the religion of the Koran.

According to the tradition of his companions, Mahomet(4) was distinguished

by the beauty of his person, an outward gift which is seldom despised, except
by

those to whom it has been refused. Before he spoke, the orator engaged on his

side the affections of a public or private audience. They applauded his
command­

ing presence, his majestic aspect, his piercing eye, his gracious smile, his
flowing

beard, his countenance that painted every sensation of the soul, and his
gestures

that enforced each expression of the tongue. In the familiar offices of life
he

scrupulously adhered to the grave and ceremonious politeness of his country:
his

respectful attention to the rich and powerful was dignified by his
condescension

and affability to the poorest citizens of Mecca: the frankness of his manner
con­

cealed the artifice of his views: and the habits of courtesy were imputed to
per­

sonal friendship or universal benevolence. His memory was capacious and reten­

tive, his wit easy and social, his imagination sublime, his judgment clear,
rapid,

and decisive. He possessed the courage both of thought and action; and, al­

though his designs might gradually expand with his success, the first idea
which

he entertained of his divine mission bears the stamp of an original and
superior

genius. The son of Abdallah was educated in the bosom of the noblest race, in

the use of the purest dialect of Arabia; and the fluency of his speech was
cor­

rected and enhanced by the practice of discreet and seasonable silence. With

these powers of eloquence, Mahomet was an illiterate barbarian: his youth had

never been instructed in the arts of reading and \vriting;(5) the common
ignorance

(1) The safest eras of Abulfeda (in Vit. c. i. p. SO of Alexander, or (he
Greeks, 882, of Bncht Naser, or Nabo-

nasser, 1316, equally lead us to the year 569. The old Arabian calendar is too
dark and uncertain to support the

Benedictines, (Art. de verifier les Dates, p. 15.) who from the day of the
month and week deduce a new mode

of calculation, and remove the birth of Mahomet to the year of Christ 570. the
tenth of November. Yet this date

would agree with the year 882 of the Greeks, which is assigned by Elmacin
(Hist. Saracen, p. 5.) and Abnlpha-

ragius (Dynast, p. 101. and Errata Pocock's version.) While we refine our
chronology, it is possible that the

illiterate prophet was ignorant of his own aire.

(2) I copy the honourable testimony of Abu Taleb to his family and nephew.
Laos Dei, qui nosastirpe

Abraham*! et semine Ismaelis constitttit et nobis regionem sacram dedit, et
nos judiccs horoinihus statuit. Porro

Mohammed filius Abdollahi neputts met (nepftsmeus) qim cum ex aequo librahitur
e Korathidjs quispiam cui

non prieponderaturui est bonitate et excellentia, et in ellectu et gloria et
acumiue etsi opum inops foerit (et

certe opes umbra transiens sunt et depositum quod reddi debvt.) desiderio
Chariijse filial Clmwailedl tenetur, et

iKa vicissim ipsius, qtiiequid aulem dotis vice petieritis, ego in toe
suscipiatn (Pucock, Specimen, e septima

parte libri Ebu Hamdum.)

(3) The private life of Mahomet, from his birth to his mission, is preserved
by Abtllfeda, (in Vit. c. iii.—vii.)

and the Arabian..writers of genuine or apoci yphal note, who are alleged by
Hottinger (Hist. Orient, p. 204—211.)

Mnracci (torn. i. p. 10—14.) and Gagnier. (Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p.
97—134.)

(4) Abulfeda, in Vit. c. 65, 66. Gagnier, Vte de M*hom?t, tout. iii. o.
272—239. the best traditions of the per-

■on and conversation of the prophet are derived from Ayesha, Ali and Abu
Horaira. (Gagnier, torn. ii. p. 267,

Ockley's Hist, of the Saracens, vol. ii. p. 149.) surnamed the lather of a
cat, who died in the year 59 of the

Ilegira.

(5) Those who believe that Mahomet could read or write, are incapable of
reading what is written, with

another pen, in the Sums, or chapters of the Koran, 7. 29.96. These texts and
the tradition of the Sonna,are -

admitted without doubt by Abulfeda, (in Vit. r. 7.) Gagnier, (Not. ad Abnlfed.
p. 15.) Pocoek, (Specimen, p.

151.) Reland, (de Religione Mohammedica, p. 236.) and Sale, (Preliminary
Discourse, p. 42.) Mr. White, al­

most a!nne,denies tbe ignorance, to accuse the imposture of the prophet. His
arguments are far from satisfac­

tory. Two short trading journeys to the fairs of Syria, were surely not
sufficient to infuse a science so rare

ittnong the citizens of Mecca: it was not in the cool deliberate act of a
treaty that Mahomet would have dropped

