THE DECLINE AND FALL

ture.(l) Twenty-two satraps, they styled themselves patriots, were tempted by

the wealth and honours of a new reign: to the soldiers, the heir of Chosroes
pro­

mised an increase of pay, to the Christians, the free exercise of their
religion; to

the captives, liberty and rewards: and to the nation an instant peace and the
re­

duction of taxes. It was determined by the conspirators that Siroes, with the
en­

signs of royalty, should appear in the camp; and if the enterprise should
fail, his

escape was contrived to the imperial court. But the new monarch was saluted

with unanimous acclamations; the flight of Chosroes (yet where could he have

fled?) was rudely arrested, eighteen sons were massacred before his face, and
he

was thrown into a dungeon where he expired on the fifth day. The Greeks and

modern Persians minutely describe how Chosroes was insulted, and famished, and

tortured, by the command of an inhuman son, who so far surpassed the example

of his father; but at the time of his death, what tongue would relate the
story of

the parricide? what eye could penetrate into the loiver of darkness? According
to

the faith and mercy of his Christian enemies, he sunk without hope into a
still

deeper abyss;(2) and it will not be denied, that tyrants of every age and sect
are

the best entitled to such infernal abodes. The glory of the house of Sassan
ended

•with the life of Chosroes; his unnatural son enjoyed only eight months the
fruit of

his crimes; and in the space of four years the regal title was assumed by nine
can­

didates, who disputed, with the sword or dagger, the fragments of an exhausted

monarchy. Every province, and each city of Persia, was the scene of independ­

ence, of discord, and of blood, and the state of anarchy prevailed about eight

years longer, till the factions were silenced and united under the common yoke
of

the Arabian caliphs. (3) *

As soon as the mountains became passable, the emperor received the welcome

news of the success of the conspiracy, the death of Chosroes, and the
elevation of

his eldest son to the throne of Persia. The authors of the revolution, eager
to dis-

Elay their merits in the court or camp of Tauris, preceded the ambassadors of

iroes, who delivered the letters of their master to his brother the emperor of
the

Romans. (4) In the language of the usurpers of every age, he imputes his own

crimes to the Deity, and, without degrading his equal majesty, he offers to
recon­

cile the long discord of the two nations, by a treaty of peace and alliance
more du­

rable than brass or iron. The conditions of the treaty were easily defined and

faithfully executed. In the recovery of the standards and prisoners which had

fallen into the hands of the Persians, the emperor imitated the example of
Augus­

tus: their care of the national dignity was celebrated by the poets of the
times, but

the decay of genius may be measured by the distance between Horace and George

of Pisidia; the subjects and brethren of Heraclius were redeemed from persecu­

tion, slavery, and exile; but instead of the Roman eagles, the true wood of
the

holy cross was restored to the importunate demand of the successor of Constan-

tine. The victor was not ambitious of enlarging the weakness of the empire;
the

son of Chosroes abandoned without regret the conquests of his father; the Per­

sians who evacuated the cities of Syria and Egypt were honourably conducted to

the frontier, and a war which had wounded the vitals of the two monarchies,
pro­

duced no change in their external and relative situation. The return of Hera­

clius from Tauris to Constantinople was a perpetual triumph; and after the ex­

ploits of six glorious campaigns, he peaceably enjoyed the sabbath of his
toils.

After a long impatience, the senate, the clergy, and the people, went forth to
meet

"their hero, with tears and acclamations, with olive branches and innumerable

lamps: he entered the capital in a chariot drawn by four elephants; and as
soon as

the emperor could disengage himself from the tumult of public joy, he tasted

more genuine satisfaction in the embraces of his mother and his son. (5)

(1) The authentic narrative of the fall of Choiroes is contained in the
letters of Heraclius, (Chron. Paschal,

p. 398.) and the history of Theophanes (p. 271.)

(3) On the first rumour of the death of Chosroeu, an Heracliad in two cantos
was instantly published at

-Constantinople by George of Pisidia, p. 97—103.) A priest and a poet might very properly exult in the dam­  
nation of the public enemy: (eptit-uu iv T«pT«p*>, r. 50.) but such mean
revenge is unworthy of a king and a

conqueror; and I am sorry to find so much black superstition (&sop*x*j Xstmiu
esrera x*i urruy** Turin *'s r»

xMTM^dovia .... it; to Tup axsToto-Sto-Tov, Sec.) in the letter of Heraclius:
he almost applauds the parricide

of Siroes as an act of piety and justice. -

(3) The best oriental accounts of this last period of '

torn. ii. p. 151— 250 ) who dissembles the parricide of Si

Assemamii, Bibliothee. Oriental, torn. Hi. p. 415—420.

(4) The letter of Siroes in the Paschal Chronicle, (p. 402.) unfortunai

The treaty appears in its execution in the histories of Theophanes ant

(5) The burden of Coraeille's song,

" Montrez Heraclius au peupte qui I'attenrl.'

of Siroes as an act of piety and justice.

(3) The best oriental accounts of this last period of the Satsanian kings are
found in Eutychius, (AnnaL

m. ii. p. 251—250 ) who dissembles the parneide of Siroes; d'Herbelot,
(Qibhotheque Orientate, p. 789.) and

itely ends before he proceeds to

and Nicephorus.

