THE DECLINE AND FALL

law, unless he bestows a tenth of his revenue; and if his conscience accuses
him of

fraud or extortion, the tenth under the idea of restitution, is enlarged to
a.tfifth.(V)

Benevolence is the foundation of justice, since we are forbid to injure those
whom

■we are bound to assist. A prophet may reveal the secrets of heaven and of
futu­

rity; but in his moral precepts he can only repeat the lessons of our own
hearts.

. The two articles of belief, and the four practical duties of Islam, are
guarded

by rewards and punishments; and the faith of the Mussulman is devoutly fixed
on

the event of the judgment and the last day. The prophet has not presumed to

determine the moment of that awful catastrophe, though he darkly announces the

signs, both in heaven and earth, which will precede the universal dissolution,
when

lite shall be destroyed, and the order of creation shall be confounded in the
primi­

tive chaos. At the blast of the trumpet, new worlds will start into being;
angels,

genii, and men, will arise from the dead, and the human soul will again be
united

to the body. The doctrine of the resurrection was first entertained by the
Egyp­

tians;^) and their mummies were embalmed, their pyramids were constructed,

to preserve the ancient mansion of the soul, during a period of three thousand

years. But the attempt is partial and unavailing; and it is with a more
philoso­

phic spirit that Mahomet relies on the omnipotence of the Creator, whose word

can re-animate the breathless clay, and collect the innumerable atoms, that no

longer retain their form or substance. (3) The intermediate state of the soul
it is

hard to decide; and those who most firmly believe her immaterial nature, are
at

a loss to understand how she can think or act without the agency of the organs

of sense..

The re-union of the soul and body will be followed by the final judgment of

mankind; and in his copy of the Magian picture, the prophet has too faithfully

represented the forms of proceeding, and even the slow and successive
operations

of an earthly tribunal. By his intolerant adversaries he is upbraided for
extend­

ing, even to themselves, the hope of salvation; for asserting the blackest
heresy,

that every man who believes in God, and accomplishes good works, may expect in

the last day a favourable sentence. Such rational indifference is ill adapted
to the

character of a fanatic; nor is it probable that a messenger from heaven should
de­

preciate the value and necessity of his own revelation. In the idiom of the
Ko­

ran,^) the belief of God is inseparable from that of Mahomet; the good works

are those which he has enjoined; and the two qualifications imply the
profession

of Islam, to which all nations and all sects are equally invited. Their
spiritual

blindness, though excused by ignorance and crowned with virtue, will be
scourged

with everlasting torments; and the tears which Mahomet shed over the tomb of

his mother," for whom he was forbidden to pray, display a striking contrast of
hu­

manity and enthusiasm.(5) The doom of the infidels is common: the measure of

their guilt and punishment is determined by the degree of evidence which they

have rejected, by the magnitude of the errors which they have entertained: the

eternal mansions of the Christians, the Jews, the Sabians, the Magians, and
the

idolaters, are sunk below each other in the abyss; and the lowest hell is
reserved

for the faithless hypocrites who have assumed the mask of religion. After the

greater part of mankind has been condemned for their opinions, the true
believers

only will be judged by their actions. The good and evil of each Mussulman will

be accurately weighed in a real or allegorical balance, and a singular mode of
com­

pensation will be allowed for the payment of injuries: the aggressor will
refund an

equivalent of his own good actions for the benefit of the person whom he has

wronged; and if he should be destitute of any moral property, the weight of
his sins

will be loaded with an adequate share of the demerits of the sufferer.
According as

(1) Thejealousy of Maracci (Prodromus, part iv. p. 33.) prompts him to
enumerate the more liberal alms of

the catholics of Rome. Fifteen great hospitals are open to many thousand
patients and pilgrims, fifteen hun­

dred maidens are annually portioned, fifty-six charity schools are founded for
both sores, one hundred and

twenty confraternities relieve the wants of their brethren, &c. The
benevolence of London is still more ex­

tensive: hut I am afraid that much more is to he ascribed to the humanity,
than to the religion, of the people.

j«v ™ C'io- »• c. 123.), and our learned countryman, Sir John Marsham (Canon.
Chronicus, p.

■ j if of the same writer (p. 254—274.) is an elaborate sketch of the infernal
regions, as they were

painted by the fancy of the Egyptians and Greeks, of the poets and
philosophers of antiquity.

(3) The Koran (c. ii. p. 259, fee. of Sale, p. 32, of Maracci, p. 97.) relates
an ingenious miracle, which satis­

fied the curiosity, and confirmed the faith,of Abraham.

(4) The candid Reiand has demonstrated, that Mahomet damns all unbelievers (de
Religion. Moharo. p.

128-143.) that devils will not be finally saved (p. 196—199.) that paradise
will not solely consist oi'cornortal de­

lights, (p. 199—205.), and that women'i souls are immortal (p. 205-209.)

(5) Al Beidawi, apud Sale, Koran, c. is. p. 164. The refusal to pray lor an
unbelieving kindred, is justified,

according to Mahomet.by the duty ofa prophet, and the example of Abraham, who
reprobated his own father

as an enemy ot God. Yet Abrabam, (he adds, c. is. v. 116. Maracci, torn. ii.
p. 317.), fuit sane pius, mitis.

