OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 241

cated with a foolish pride, that his birth had given him the command of
millions^

of whom the smallest community would not have chosen him for their local ma­

gistrate. His favourite ministers were two beings the least susceptible of
human

sympathy; a eunuch and a monk: to the one he abandoned the palace, to the
other

the finances; the former corrected the emperor's mother with a scourge, the
lat­

ter suspended the insolvent tributaries, with their heads downward?, over a
slow

and smoky fire. Since the days of Commodus and Caracalla, the cruelty of the

Roman princes had most commonly been the effect of their fear; but Justinian,

who possessed some vigour of character, enjoyed the sufferings, and braved the

revenge, of his subjects about ten years, till the measure was full of his
crimes

and of their patience. In a dark dungeon, Leontius, a general of reputation,
had

groaned above three years with some of the noblest and most deserving of the
pa­

tricians: he was suddenly drawn forth to assume the government of Greece; and

this promotion of an injured man was a mark of the contempt rather than of the

confidence of his prince. As he was followed to the port by the kind offices
of

his friends, Leontius observed, with a sigh, that he was a victim adorned for
sa­

crifice, and that inevitable death would pursue his footsteps. They ventured
to

reply, that glory and empire might be the recompense of a generous resolution;
that

every order of men abhorred the reign of a monster; and that the hands of two

hundred thousand patriots expected only the voice of a leader. The night was

chosen for their deliverance; and in the first effort of the conspirators, the
prefect

was slain; and the prisons were forced open: the emissaries'of Leontius
proclaimed

in every street,—Christians! to St. Sofihia: and the seasonable text of the
patri­

arch, This is the day of the Lord! was the prelude of an inflammatory sermon.

From the church the people adjourned to the hippodrome: Justinian, in whose

cause not a sword had been drawn, was dragged before these tumultuary judges,

and their clamours demanded the instant death of the tyrant. But Leontius, who

was already clothed with the purple, cast an eye of pity on the prostrate son
of

his own benefactor and of so many emperors. The life of Justinian was spared;

the amputation of his nose, perhaps of his tongue, was imperfectly performed:
the

happy flexibility of the Greek language could impose the name of Rhinotmetus;

and the mutilated tyrant was banished to Chersonse in Crim-Tartary, a lonely

settlement, where corn, wine, and oil, were imported as foreign luxuries.

On the edge of the Scythian wilderness, Justinian still cherished the pride of
his

birth and the hope of his restoration. After three years' exile, he received
the

pleasing intelligence that his injury was avenged by a second revolution, and
that

Leontius in his turn had been dethroned and mutilated by the rebel Apsimar,
who

assumed the more respectable name of Tiberius. But the claim of lineal suc­

cession was still formidable to a plebeian usurper, and his jealousy was
stimulated

by the complaints and charges of the Chersonites, who beheld the vices of the
ty­

rant in the spirit of the exile. With a band of followers, attached to his
person

by common hope or common despair, Justinian fled from the inhospitable shore

to the horde of the Chozars, who pitched their tents between the Tanais and
Bo-

rysthenes. The khan entertained with pity and respect the royal suppliant:
Phana-

goria, once an opulent city, on the Asiatic side of the lake Moeotis, was
assigned

for his residence; and every Roman prejudice was stifled in his marriage with
the

sister of the barbarian, who seems, however, from the name of Theodora, to

have received the sacrament of baptism. But the faithless Chozar was soon

tempted by the gold of Constantinople; and had not the design been revealed by

the conjugal love of Theodora, her husband must have been assassinated, or be­

trayed into the power of his enemies. After strangling, with his own hands,
the

two emissaries of the khan, Justinian sent back his wife to her brother, and
em­

barked on the Euxine in search of new and more faithful allies. His vessel was

assaulted by a violent tempest; and one of his pious companions advised him to

deserve the mercy of God by a vow of general forgiveness, if he should be re­

stored to the throne. " Of forgiveness (replied the intrepid tyrant ?) may I
pe­

rish this instant—may the Almighty whelm me in the waves—if I consent to spare

a single head of my enemies!" He survived this impious menace, sailed into the

mouth of the Danube, trusted his person in the royal village of the
Bulgarians,

and purchased the aid of Terbelis, a pagan conqueror, by the promise of his

daughter, and a fair partition of the treasures of the empire. The Bulgarian

kingdom extended to the confines of Thrace; and the two princes besieged Con­

stantinople at the head of fifteen thousand horse. Apsimar was dismayed by the

sudden and hostile apparition of his rival, whose head had been promised by
the

Vox,, nr. n

