OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3fi9

merit was not overlooked by the two first successors of Mahomet; they were in­

debted to his arms for the conquest of Palestine; and in all the battles and
sieges

of Syria, he united with the temper of a chief the valour of an adventurous
soldier.

In a visit to Medina, the caliph expressed a wish to survey the sword which
had cut

down so many Christian warriors; the son of Aasi unsheathed a short-and
ordina­

ry scimitar; and as he perceived the surprise of Omar, "Alas!" said the modest
Sa­

racen, " the sword itself, without the arm of its master, is neither sharper
nor more

vveighty than the sword of Pharezdak the poet."(l) After the conquest of Egypt

he was recalled by the jealousy of the caliph Othman; but in the subsequent
trou­

bles, the ambition of a soldier, a statesman, and an orator, emerged from a
private

station. His powerful support, both in council and in the field, established
the_

throne of the Ommiades; the administration and revenue of Egypt were restored'

by the gratitude of Moawiyah to a faithful friend who had raised himself above
the

rank of a subject; and Amrou ended his days in the palace and city which he
had

founded on the banks of the Nile. His dying speech to his children is
celebrated

by the Arabians as a model of eloquence ant! wisdom: he deplored the errors of

his youth; but if the penitent was still infected by the vanity of a poet, he
might

exaggerate the venom and mischief of his impious compo^tions.(2)

From his camp, in Palestine, Amrou had surprised or anticipated the caliph's

leave for the invasion of Egypt. (3) The magnanimous Omar trusted in his God

and his sword, which had shaken the thrones of Chosroes and Caisar; but when

he compared the slender force of the Moslems with the greatness of the enter­

prise, he condemned his own rashness, and listened to his timid companions.
The

pride and the greatness of Pharaoh were familiar to the readers of the Koran;

and a tenfold repetition, of prodigies had been scarcely sufficient to effect,
not the

victory, but the flight of six hundred thousand of the children of Israel: the
cities

of Egypt were many and populous; their architecture was strong and solid; the

Nile, with its numerous branches, was alone an insuperable barrier; and the
gra­

nary of the imperial city would be obstinately defended by the Roman powers.

In this perplexity, the commander of the faithful resigned himself to the
decision

of chance, or, in his opinion, of Providence. At the head of only four
thousand

Arabs, the intrepid Amrou had marched away from his station of Gaza when he

was overtaken by the messenger of Omar. " If you are still in Syria," said the

ambiguous mandate, "retreat without delay: but if, at the receipt of this
epistle,

you have already reached the frontiers of Egypt, advance with confidence, and

depend on the succour of God and of your brethren." The experience, per­

haps the secret intelligence of Amrou had taught him to suspect the mutability
of

courts; and he continued his march till his tents were unquestionably pitched
on

Egyptian ground. He there assembled his officers, broke the seal, perused the

epistle, gravely inquired the name and situation of the place, and declared
his

ready obedience to the commands of the caliph. After a siege of thirty days,
he

took possession of Farmah or Pelusium, and that key of Egypt, as it has been

justly named, unlocked the entrance of the country, as far as the ruins of
Helio-

polis and the neighbourhood of the modern Cairo.

On the western side of the Nile, at a small distance to the east of the pyra­

mids, at a small distance to the south of the Delta, Memphis, one hundred and

fifty furlongs in circumference, displayed the magnificence of ancient kings.
Un­

der the reign of the Ptolemies and Csesars, the seat of government was removed

to the sea-coast; the ancient capital was eclipsed by the arts and opulence of

Alexandria; the palaces, and at length the temples, were reduced to a desolate

and ruinous condition: yet in the age of Augustus, and even in that of
Constan-

tine, Memphis was still numbered among the greatest and most populous of the

provincial cities.(4) The banks of the Nile, in this place of the breadth of
three

(1) This laying is preserved by Poeoek. (Vot. ad Carmen Tograi, p. 184.) and
justly applauded by Mr.

Harris. (Philosophical Arrangements, p. 350.)

(2) For the life and character of Amrou, see Ockley, (Hist, of the Saracens,
vol. i. p. 28. 83.94. 328. 342. 344.

and to the end of the volume; vol, li.p. 51. 55. 57. 74. 110—112. 162.) and
Otter. (Mem. dp P leademie dts In­

scriptions, torn. 21. p. 131.132.) The readers of Tacitus may aptly compare
Ve.pasian and Mncianus, with

Moawiyah and Amrou. Yet the resemblance is still more in the situation, loan
in the characters of the men.

(.1) Al Wakidi had likewise^ composed a separate history of the conquest of
Egypt, which Mr. Ockley could

never procure; and his own inquiries (vol. i. p. 344—302.) have added very
little to the original text of Euty-

chius (Annal. torn. ii. p. 296—323. vers. Poeock,) the Melchite patriarch of
Alexandria, who lived three hun­

dred years after the revolution.

(4) Strabo, an accurate and attentive spectator, observes of Heliopolis ; vwt
ptv ouv itti nttytpiucoc it woxic;

(Geojrraph. lib. xvii. p. 1158.) but of Memphis he declares, woa.ic P iirrt
p.ty*w rs xxi irwevfyflc, Stwtp* //;t'

AA^vSpsfatv; (p. 1161.) he notices, however, the mixture of inhabitants and
the ruins of the palaces. In the

Vol. III. 47

