148 THE DECLINE AND FALL

' exact this unprofitable penalty of life or limb. As the manners of Rome were
in­

sensibly polished, the criminal code of the decemvirs was abolished by the
humani­

ty of accusers, witnesses, and judges: and impunity became the consequence of
im­

moderate rigour. The Porcian and Valerian laws prohibited the magistrates

from inflicting on a free citizen any capital, or even corporal punishment;
and the

obsolete statutes of blood were artfully, and perhaps truly, ascribed to the
spirit,

not of patrician, but of regal, tyranny.

In the absence of penal laws and the insufficiency of civil actions, the peace
and

justice of the city were imperfectly maintained by the private jurisdiction of
the

citizens. The malefactors who replenish our gaols, are the outcasts of
society, and

the crimes for which they suffer may be commonly ascribed to ignorance,
poverty,

and brutal appetite. For the perpetration of similar enormities, a vile
plebeian

might claim and abuse the sacred character of a member of the republic: but on

the proof or suspicion of guilt, the slave, or the stranger was nailed to a
cross, and

this strict and summary justice might be exercised without restraint over the
great­

est part of the populace of Rome. Each family contained a domestic tribunal,

which was not confined, like that of the pretor, to the cognizance of external
ac­

tions: virtuous principles and habits were inculcated by the discipline of
education;

and the Roman father was accountable to the state for the manners of his
children,

Since he deposed, without appeal, of their life, their liberty, and their
inheritance.

In some pressing emergencies, the citizen was authorized to avenge his private
or

public wrongs. The consent of the Jewish, the Athenian, and the Roman laws,

approved the slaughter of the nocturnal thief; though in open daylight a
robber

could not be slain without some previous evidence of danger and complaint.
Who­

ever surprised an adulterer in his nuptial bed might freely exercise his
revenge;(l)

the most bloody or wanton outrage was excused by the provocation;{2) nor was
it

before the reign of Augustus that the husband was reduced to weigh the rank of

the offender, or that the parent was condemned to sacrifice his daughter with
her

guilty seducer. After the expulsion of the kings, the ambitious Roman who
should

dare to assume their title, or imitate their tyranny, was devoted to the
infernal

gods: each of his fellow-citizens was armed with a sword of justice; and the
act of

Brutus, however repugnant to gratitude or prudence, had been already
sanctified

by the judgment of his country. (3) The barbarous practice of wearing arms in

the midst of peace, (4) and the bloody maxims of honour, were unknown to the
Ro­

mans; and, during the two purest ages, from the establishment of equal freedom

to the end of the Punic wars, the city was never disturbed by sedition, and
rarely

polluted with atrocious crimes. The failure of penal laws was more sensibly
felt

when every vice was inflamed by faction at home and dominion abroad. In the

time of Cicero, each private citizen enjoyed the privilege of anarchy; each
minis­

ter of the republic was exalted to the temptations of legal power, and their
vir­

tues are entitled to the warmest praise as the spontaneous fruits of nature or
phi­

losophy. After a triennial indulgence of lust, rapine, and cruelty, Verres,
the ty­

rant of Sicily, could only be sued for the pecuniary restitution of three
hundred

thousand pounds sterling; and such was the temper of the laws, the judges, and

perhaps the accuser himself,(5) that on refunding a thirteenth part of his
plunder,

Verres could retire to an easy and luxurious exile. (6)

The first imperfect attempt to restore the proportion of crimes and
punishments,

was made by the dictator Sylla, who in the midst of his sanguinary triumph,
as­

pired to restrain the license, rather than to oppress the liberty, of the
Romans.

He gloried in the arbitrary proscription of four thousand seven hundred
citizens. (7)

(1) The first speech of Lysias (R<*iske, Orator. Gitec. torn. v, p. 2—48.) is
in defence of a husband who had

"killed the adulterer. The right of husbands and fathers at Rome and Athens is
discussed with much learning

"by Dr, Taylor (Lectiones Lysiaca;, c. xi, in Reiske. torn. vi. p. 301—308.)

(2) See Cassation ad Athenaeum (lib. i. c. v. p. 19.) Percurrent raphanique
mugilesqne (Catntl. p. 41, 42.

edtt. Vossian.) Hune miKrilr* inlrat (Juvenal. Satir. x. 317.) Hunc perminxere
catones (Horat. lib. i. Satir. n.

44.) familiie stnprandum dedit . . . uaiuli non fnit. (Val. Maxim, lib. vi. e.
1. No. 13.)

(3) This law is noticed by Liv-y (2. 8.) and Plutarch Cin Publicola, torn. i.
p. 197.;) and it fully justifies the

public opinion on the death of Caesar, which Suetonius could publish under the
imperial government. Jure

csesns existimatur (in Julio, c. Ixxvi.) Read the letters that passed
betweenCicero and Marius a few months

after the ides of March (ad Fain. si. 27,28.)

(4) rljwTOi Se A&V*"' tow n trioNipou x*t:S:vto. Thucyd'ul. lib. i. c. 6.
Thehistorian also considers this circum­

stance as the test of civilization, would disdain the barbarism of a European
court.

(5) He first rated at millies (800,000/.) the damages of Sicily (Divinatio in
Ccecilifem, e. v.) which he after­

wards reduced to quadringenties (320,000/—1. Actio in Verrem, c. xviii.) and
was finally content with tricies

(24,000/.) Plutarch in Ciceron. (torn. iii. p. 1584.) has not dissembled the
popular suspicion and report.

(6) Verre, lived near thirty years after his trial, till the second
triumvirate, when ne was proscribed by the

■taste of Mark Antony for the sake of his Corinthian plate (Plin. Hist. Natur.
xxxiv. 3.)

(7) Such is the number assigned by Valerius Maximus (lib, i. c. 2. No. 10
Florus (4.21.) distinguishes two

