112 THE DECLINE AND FALL

of guards or domestic troops, had been augmented to the number of five
thousand

five hundred men, whose ordinary station was in the peaceful cities of Asia.
But

the places of the brave Armenians were insensibly supplied by lazy citizens,
who

purchased an exception from the duties of civil life, without being exposed to
the

danger of military service. Of such soldiers, few could be tempted to sally
from

the gates; and none could be persr-aded to remain in the field, unless they
wanted

strength and speed to escape from the Bulgarians. The report of the fugitives
ex­

aggerated the numbers and fierceness of an enemy, who had polluted holy
virgins,

and abandoned new-born infants to the dogs and vultures; a crowd of rustics,
im­

ploring food and protection, increased the consternation of the city, and the
tents

of Zabergen were pitched at the distance of twenty miles,(l) on the banks of a

small river, which encircles Melanthius, and afterwards falls into the
Propontis. (2)

Justinian trembled; and those who had only seen the emperor in his old age,
were

pleased to suppose, that he had lost the alacrity and vigour of his youth. By
his

command, the vessels of gold and silver were removed from the churches in the

neighbourhood, and even the suburbs of Constantinople: the ramparts were lined

with trembling spectators: the golden gate was crowded with useless generals
and

tribunes, and the senate shared the fatigues and the .apprehensions of the
popu­

lace.

But the eyes of the prince and people were directed to a feeble veteran, who
was

compelled by the public danger to resume the armour in which he had entered

Carthage and defended Rome. The horses of the royal stables, of private
citizens,

and even of the circus, were hastily collected; the emulation of the old and
young

was roused by the name of Belisarius, and his first encampment was in the
presence

ef a victorious enemy. His prudence, and the labour of the friendly peasants,
se­

cured, with a ditch and rampart, the repose of the night: innumerable fires,
and

clouds of dust, were artfully contrived to magnify the opinion of his
strength: his

soldiers suddenly passed from despondency to presumption; and while ten thou­

sand voices demanded the battle, Belisarius dissembled his knowledge, that in
the

hour of trial he must depend on the firmness of three hundred veterans. The

next morning the Bulgarian cavalry advanced to the charge. But they heard the

shouts of multitudes, they beheld the arms and discipline of the front; they
were

assaulted on the flanks by two ambuscades which rose from the woods; their
fore­

most warriors fell by the hand of the aged hero and his guards; and the
swiftness

of their evolutions was rendered useless by the close attack and rapid pursuit
of

the Romans. In this action (so speedy was their flight) the Bulgarians lost
only

four hundred horse; but Constantinople was saved; and Zabergan, who felt the

hand of a master, withdrew to a respectful distance. But his friends were
nume­

rous in the councils of the emperor, and Belisarius obeyed with reluctance,
the

commands of envy and Justinian, which forbade him to achieve the deliverance
of

his country. On his return to the city, the people, still conscious of their
danger,

accompanied his triumph with acclamations of joy and gratitude, which were im­

puted as a crime to the victorious general. But when he entered the palace,
the

courtiers were silent, and the emperor, after a cold and thankless embrace,
dis­

missed him to mingle with the train of slaves. Yet so deep was the impression
of

his glory on the minds of men, that Justinian, in the seventy-seventh year of
his

age, was encouraged to advance near forty miles from the capital, and to
inspect

in person the restoration of the long wall. The Bulgarians wasted the summer
in

the plains of Thrace; but they were inclined to peace by the failure of their
rash

attempts on Greece and the Chersonesus. A menace of killing their prisoners

quickened the payment of heavy ransoms; and the departure of Zabergan was

hastened by the report, that double-prowed vessels were built on the Danube to

intercept his passage. The danger was soon forgotten; and a vain question,
whe­

ther their sovereign had shown more wisdom or weakness, amused the idleness of

the city. (3)

About two years after the last victory of Belisarius, the emperor returned
from

(1) The distance from Constantinople to MebuitUas, Villa Ctesariana (Ammian.
Mftrcellin. 30.11^) is va-

riously fixed at one hundred and two, or one hundred and forty stadia (Suidat,
torn. ii. p. 532,523. Agathiat.

lib. r. p. 158.0 or cigbuen or nineteen miles (Itineraria, p. 133. 230.323.
332. and Wesseling's Observations J

The first twelve miles, as far as Rhegium, were paved by Justinian, who built
a bridge over a morass or gullet

between a lake and the sea, (Procop. de Edif. lib. iv. c. 8.)

(2) The Atyras (Pompon. Mela. lib. ii. e. 2. p. 169. edit. Vrns.) At the
river's mouth, a town or castle of

the same name was fortified by Justinian (Procop. de Edif. lib. iv. c. 2.
Itinear. p, 570. and Wrsscling.)

(3) The Bulgarian war, and the last victory of Belisarius, are imperfectly
represented ia the prolix decla*

reation of Agathiaj (lib. v. p. 154-171.) and the dry chronicle oi'TUeopkaues
(p. 19,138.)

