THE DECLINE AND FALL

and the promised Messiah. Their obstinacy converted his friendship into impla-

cable hatred, with which he pursued that unfortunate people to the last moment

of his life; and in the double character of an apostle and a conqueror, his
perse­

cution was extended to both worlds.(l) The Kainoka dwelt at Medina under the

protection of the city: he seized the occasion of an accidental tumult, and
sum­

moned them to embrace his religion, or contend with him in battle. " Mas!" re­

plied the trembling Jews, "we are ignorant of the use of arms, but we
persevere

in the faith and worship of our fathers; why wilt thou reduce us to the
necessity

of a just defence?" The unequal conflict was terminated in fifteen days; audit

was with extreme reluctance that Mahomet yielded to the importunity of his al­

lies and consented to spare the lives of the captives. But their riches were
con­

fiscated, their arms became more effectual in the hands of the Mussulmans; and

a wretched colony of seven hundred exiles was driven with their wives and
chil­

dren to implore a refuge on the confines of Syria. The Nadharites were more

guilty, since they conspired in a friendly interview to assassinate the
prophet. He

besieged their castle three miles from Medina, but their resolute defence
obtained

an honourable capitulation; and the garrison, sounding their trumpets and
beating

their drums, was permitted to depart with the honours of war. The Jews had

excited and joined the war of the Koreish: no sooner had the nations retired
from

the ditch, than Mahomet, without laying aside his armour, marched on the same

day to extirpate the hostile race of the children of Koraidha. After a
resistance of

twenty-five days, they surrendered at discretion. They trusted to the
intercession

of their old allies, of Medina: they could not be ignorant that fanaticism
obliterates

the feelings of humanity. A venerable elder, to whose judgment they appealed,

pronounced the sentence of their death: seven hundred Jews were dragged in

chains to the market place of the city: they descended alive into the grave
pre­

pared for their execution and burial; and the apostle beheld with an
inflexible eye

the slaughter of his helpless enemies. Their sheep and camels were inherited
by

the Mussulmans: three hundred cuirasses, five hundred pikes, a thousand
lances,

composed the most useful portion of the spoil. Six days' journey to the north­

east of Medina, the ancient and wealthy town of Chaibar was the seat of the
Jew­

ish power of Arabia; the territory, a fertile spot in the desert, was covered
with

plantations and cattle, and protected by eight castles, some of which were
esteemed

of impregnable strength. The forces of Mahomet consisted of two hundred horse

and fourteen hundred foot: in the succession of eight regular and painful
sieges

they were exposed to danger and fatigue, and hunger; and the most undaunted

chiefs despaired of the event. The apostle revived their faith and courage by
the

example of Ali, on whom he bestowed the surname of the Lion of God: perhaps

we may believe that a Hebrew champion of gigantic size was cloven to the chest

by his irresistible scimitar: but we cannot praise the modesty of romance,
which

represents him as tearing from its hinges the gate of a fortress, and wielding
the

ponderous buckler in his left hand.(2) After the reduction of the castles, the
town

of Chaibar submitted to the yoke. The chief of the tribe was tortured, in the
pre­

sence of Mahomet, to force a confession of his hidden treasure: the industry
of

the shepherds and husbandmen was rewarded with a precarious toleration: they

were permitted, so long as it should please the conqueror, to improve their
patri­

mony, in equal shares, for Ms emolument and their own. Under the reign of

Omar, the Jews of Chaibar were transplanted to Syria; and the caliph alleged

the injunction of his dying master, that one and the true religion should be
pro­

fessed in his native land of Arabia. (3)

Five times each day the eyes of Mahomet were turned towards Mecca,(4) and

he was urged by the most sacred and powerful motives, to revisit, as a
conqueror,

the city and temple from whence he had been driven as an exile. The Caaba

was present to his waking and sleeping fancy: an idle dream was translated
into

(1) The wars of Mahomet against the Jewish tribes, of Kainoka, the
Nailhirites, Koraidha. and Chaibar, are

related by Abulfeda (p. 61. 71. 77. 87, &c) and Gagnier. (torn. ii. 01—65.
107—112. 139—148. 268 294.1

(2) Abu Rafe, the servant of Mahomet, is said to affirm that he himself, and
seven other men, afterward*

tried, without success, to move the same gate from the ground. (Abulfeda, p.
90.) Abu Rafe was an eye­

witness, but who will be witness for A bu Raf>- i

(3) The banishment of the Jews is attested by Elmacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 9.)
and the great Al Zaliari. (Gag-

tiier, torn. II. p. 285.) Yet Neibuhr (Description de P Arable, p. 324.)
believes that the Jewish religion, and Ka-

reite sect, nre still professed by the tribe of Chaibar; and that in the
plunder of the caravans, the disciples of

Moses are the confederates of those of Mahomet.

(4) The successive steps of the reduction of Mecca are related by Ahulfeda,
(p. 84—87. 97—100. 102—111.)

and Gagmer, torn. n. p. 209-245.309-322. torn. iii. p. 1-58.) Elmacin, (Hist.
Saracen, p. s-io.) Abulpba-

ragius. (Dynast, p. 103.) *

