THE DECLINE AND FALL

the offspring of slaves and strangers, was despicable in the eyes of the
victorious

barbarians. As often as the Franks or Lombards expressed their most bitter
con­

tempt of a foe, they called him a Roman; "and in this name," says the bishop

Liutprand, " we include whatever is base, whatever is cowardly, whatever is
per­

fidious, the extremes of avarice and luxury, and every vice that can
prostitute the

dignity of human nature. "(1) By the necessity of their situation, the
inhabitants

of Rome were cast into the rough model of a republican government: they were

compelled to elect some judges in peace, and some leaders in war; the nobles
as­

sembled to deliberate, and their resolves could not be executed without the
union

and consent of the multitude. The style of the Roman senate and people was re­

vived, (2) but the spirit was fled; and their new independence was disgraced
by

the tumultuous conflict of licentiousness and oppression. The want of laws
could

only be supplied by the influence of religion, and their foreign and domestic
coun­

sels were moderated by the authority of the bishop. His alms, his sermons, his

correspondence with the kings and prelates of the west, his recent services,
their

gratitude, an oath, accustomed the Romans to consider him as the first
magistrate

or prince of the city. The Christian humility of the popes was not offended by

the name of Domimts, or Lord; and their face and inscription are still
apparent

on the most ancient coins. (3) Their temporal dominion is now confirmed by the

reverence of a thousand years; and their noblest title is the free choice of a
peo­

ple, whom they had redeemed from slavery. .- W

In the quarrels of ancient Greece, the holy people of Ellis enjoyed a
perpetual

peace, under the protection of Jupiter, and in the exercise of the Olympic
games. (4)

Happy would it have been for the Romans if a similar privilege had guarded the

patrimony of St. Peter from the calamities of war; if the Christians who
visited

the holy threshold, would have sheathed their swords in the presence of the
apos­

tle and his successor. But this mystic circle could have been traced only by
the

wand of a legislator and a sage; this pacific system was incompatible with the

zeal and ambition of the popes; the Romans were not addicted, like the inhabi­

tants of Ellis, to the innocent and placid labours of agriculture; and the
barba­

rians of Italy, though softened by the climate, were far below the Grecian
states

in the institutions of public and private life. A memorable example of
repentance

and piety was exhibited by Liutprand, king of the Lombards. In arms, at the

gate of the Vatican, the conqueror listened to the voice of Gregory 11.(5)
with­

drew his troops, resigned his conquests, respectfully visited the church of
St. Pe­

ter, and after performing his devotions, offered his sword and dagger, his
cuirass

and mantle, his silver cross and his crown of gold, on the tomb of the
apostle.

But this religious fervour was the illusion, perhaps the artifice of the
moment; the

sense of interest is strong and lasting; the love of arms and rapine was
congenial

to the Lombards; and both the prince and people were irresistibly tempted
bythe

disorders of Italy, the nakedness of Rome, and the unwarlike profession of her

new chief. On the first edicts of the emperor, they declared themselves the

champions of the holy images: Liutprand invaded the province of Romagna,

which had already assumed that distinctive appellation; the catholics of the
ex,-

archate yielded without reluctance to his civil and military power; and a
foreign

enemy was introduced for the first time into the impregnable fortress of
Ravenna.

That city and fortress were speedily recovered by the- active diligence and
mari­

time forces of the Venetians; and those faithful subjects obeyed the
exhortations

of Gregory himself, in separating the personal guilt of Leo from the general
cause

of the Roman empire. (6) The Greeks were less mindful of the service, than the

(1) Quos (Romanes) nos, Langobardi scilicet, Saxones, Franci, Lotharingi,
Bajoari, Suevi, Burgundiones

tanto dcdigtiamur ut inimicos nostra* commofii, nil aliud, contttmeliarum nisi
Romane. dicamui: tine solo, id

est Komanorum nomine, quicquid i^nobilitatis, quicqnid timiditntis, quicquid
avaritise. quicqnid luxuria:,

quicqnid mendacii, immo quicquid vitiorum est comprehendentes (Liutprand. in
Legat. Script. Ita). torn. ii.

pars. I. p. 4S1.) For the sins of Cato or Tully, Minos might have imposed, as
a tit penance, the daily perusal

of this barbarous passage.

(2) Pipino reg? Francorum, omnii S''natiis atque universa populi generalitas a
Deo serrate Romanse urbis

(Codex Carolin. epist. xxxri. in Script. Ifal. torn, lit pari. 8. p. 160.) The
names of senatus and senator were

never totally extinct (Dissert. Chorograph. p. 216,217.) but in the middle age
they signified little more than

uobiles optimates, &e. (Ducange. Gloss. Latin.)

(3) See Muratori Antiquit. Italia; MVdii Mv), torn. ii. dissertat. 27. p. 548.
On one of these coins we read Ha-

dnanui Papa (A. D. 772;) on the reverse, Viet. DDNN, with the word CONOB.
which the pere Josbert (Science

des Medailles, torn. ii. p. 42.) explains by COATstantinopoli Officina fcV,
(secunda.)

(4) See West's Dissertation on the Olympic Games (Pindar, vol. ii. p. 32—36.
edition in duodecimo,) and the

judicious reflections of Pokhius (lorn. i. lib. iv. p. 466. edit. Gronov.)

(5) The speech of Gregory to the Lombard is finely composed by Sigonius (de
Regno Ilaliss lib. iii. Opera,

torn. ii. p. 173.,) who imitates the license and the spirit of Sallust or
Livy.

C3) The Venetian historians, John Sagorninus (Chron. Venct. p. 13.) and tbe
doge Andrew Dandolo (Scrip.

