OF THE ROWAN EMPIRE. £11

■Who carried burning tapers in their hands, and chanted litanies to the mother
of

God, they proceeded from their monasteries to the palace. The people were edi­

fied and inflamed by this extraordinary spectacle, and the trembling monarch
list­

ened to the prayers and abjurations of the saints, who boldly pronounced, that
none

could hope for salvation, unless they embraced the person and the creed of the

orthodox successor of Athanasius. At the same time every avenue of the throne

was assaulted with gold. Under the decent names of eulogies and benedictions,

the courtiers of both sexes were bribed according to the measure of their
power

and rapaciousness. But their incessant demands despoiled the sanctuaries of
Con­

stantinople and Alexandria; and the authority of the patriarch was unable to
si­

lence the just murmur of his clergy, that a debt of 60,000/. had already been
con­

tracted to support the expense of this scandalous corruption.(l) Pulcheria,
who

relieved her brother from the weight of an empire, was the firmest pillar of
or­

thodoxy: and so intimate was the alliance between the thunders of the synod
and

the whispers of the court, that Cyril was assured of success if he could
displace

one eunuch, and substitute another in the favour of Theodosius. Yet the
Egyptian

could not boast of a glorious or decisive victory. The emperor, with unaccus­

tomed firmness, adhered to his promise of protecting the innocence of the
oriental

bishops; and Cyril softened his anathemas, and confessed, with ambiguity and
re­

luctance, a twofold nature of Christ, before he was permitted to satiate his
revenge

against the unfortunate Nestorius.(2)

The rash and obstinate Nestorius, before the end of the synod, was oppressed

by Cyril, betrayed by the court, and faintly supported by his eastern friends.
A

sentiment of fear or indignation prompted him, while it was yet time, to
affect the

glory of a voluntary abdication;(.") his wish, or at least his request, was
readily

granted; he was conducted with honour from Ephesus to his old monastery of An-

tioch; and after a short pause, his successors, Maximian and Proclus, were ac­

knowledged as the lawful bishops of Constantinople. But in the silence of his
cell,

the degraded patriarch could no longer resume the innocence and security of a

private monk. The past he regretted, he was discontented with the present, and

the future he had reason to dread: the oriental bishops successively
disengaged

their cause from his unpopular name, and each day decreased the number of
schis­

matics who revered Nestorius as the confessor of the faith. Afte» a residence
at

Antioch of four years, the hand of Theodosius subscribed an edict,(4) which
ranked

him with Simon the magician, proscribed his opinions and followers, condemned

his writings to the flames, and banished his person fii'st to Petra in Arabia,
and at

length to Oasis, one of the islands of the Lybian desert. (5) Secluded from
the

church and from the world, the exile was still pursued by the rage of bigotry
and

war. A wandering tribe of the Blemmyes or Nubians invaded his solitary prison;

in their retreat they dismissed a crowd of useless captives; but no sooner had
Nes­

torius reached the banks of the Nile, than he would gladly have escaped from a

Roman and orthodox city to the milder servitude of the savages. His flight was

punished as a new crime: the soul of a patriarch inspired the civil and
ecclesiasti­

cal powers of Egypt; the magistrates, the soldiers, the monks, devoutly
tortured

the enemy of Christ and St. Cyril; and, as far as the confines of Ethiopia,
the he­

retic was alternately dragged and recalled, till his aged body was broken by
the

(1) Clerici qui hie itint contristantnr. quod ecelesia Alexandrine nudaia sit
linfuf causa turbelse; et debet

ptsxter ilia quae hinc transiuissa situ auri libra* mille quinpintas. Et nunc
ei tcriptum est ut prsestet; ted de

tua ecclesia praesta araritis quorum nosti, etc. This curious and original
letter, from Cyril's archdeacon to

his creature, the new bishop of Constantinople, has been nnaccountably
preserved in an old Latin version,

(Synodicon. c ZDS. Concil. torn. iv. p. 465—408.) The mask is almost dropped,
and (he saints speak the honest

language of interest and confederacy.

(2) The tedious negotiations that succeeded the synod of Ephesus are diffusely
relatrd in the original Acts

(Concil. torn. iii. p. 1339—1771. ad fin. vol. and the Synodicon, in torn,
iv.,) Socrates, (lib. vii. c. 28. 35. 40,41.)

Evagrius (lib. i.e. 6. 8. 12.,) Liberatusfc. 7—10.) Tillemont (iMem. Eccles.
torn. xiv. p. 487—076.) The most

patient reader will thank me for compressing so much nonsense and falsehood in
a fewlines.

(3) Aurou ti etujfiejfiroc, MSTM TS Hmtov iTrxvatnXtvtTBlt fiOvxiryir.v.
Evagrius, lib. i. C. 7. The

original letters in the Synodicon (c. xv. 24—26.) .justify the appearance of a
voluntary resignation, which is as-

ierted by Ebed-Jesn, a Nestorian writer, anud Asseman. Bibliot. Orientale,
torn. iii. p. 299—102.

(4) See the imperial letters in the Acts of the Synod of Ephesus. (Concil.
torn. iii. p. 1730—1735.) The

odious name of Simonians, which was affixed to the disciples of this ti
pxrwaov; J.Wxmmxj was designed *s «u

ovtiSeiri 9rltdXjp9lt>rK ximtov vrnfuvutv rJSXa»04W, TJtv <xpxpTt]iuxTvi>, K»»
h*,ti Tijfcupiscc, f*HTt 6xvovretg ariptx;

ixtoc uTotpx-" tv. Yet these were Christians ! who differed only in names and
in shadows.

(5) The metaphor of islands is applied by the grave civilians (Pandect, lib.
xlviii. tit. xxii. leg. vii.) to those

happy spots which are discriminated by water ana verdure from the Lybian
sands. Three of these under the

common name of Oasis, or Alvahat—1. The temple of Jupiter Ammon. 2. The middle
Ossis, three days'jour­

ney to the west of Lycopolis. 3. The southern, where Nestorius was banished,
in the first climate, and only

three days'journey from the confines of Nubia. See a learned note of Micbaelis
(ad Detcript. Egypu AbuT-

fetf^ P» 21—340

