THE DECLINE AND FALL

health again revived their passions and habits; but philosophy must disdain
the

observation of Procopius, that the lives of such men were guarded by the
peculiar

favour of fortune or providence. He forgot, or perhaps he secretly
recollected,

that the plague had touched the person of Justinian himself; but the
abstemious

diet of the emperor may suggest, as in the case of Socrates, a more rational
and

honourable cause for his recovery. (1) During his sickness, the public
consterna­

tion was expressed in the habits of the citizens; and their idleness and
despondence

occasioned a general scarcity in the capital of the east.

Contagion is the inseparable symptom of the plague; which, by mutual respira­

tion, is transfused from the infected persons to the lungs and stomach of
those who

approach them. While philosophers believe and tremble, it is singular, that
the

existence of a real danger should have been denied bv a people most prone to
vain

and imaginary terrors.(2) Yet the fellow-citizens of Procopius were satisfied,
by

some short and partial experience, that the infection could not be gained by
the

closest conversation;(3) and this persuasion might support the assiduity of
friends

or physicians in the care of the sick, whom human prudence would have con­

demned to solitude and despair. But the fatal security, like the
predestination of

the Turks, must have aided the progress of the contagion; and those salutary
pre­

cautions, to which Europe is indebted for her safety, were unknown to the go­

vernment of Justinian. No restraints were imposed on the free and frequent in­

tercourse of the Roman provinces; from Persia to France, the nations were

mingled and infected by wars and emigrations: and the pestilential odour,
which

lurks for years in a bale of cotton, was imported, by the abuse of trade, into
the

most distant regions. The mode of its propagation is explained by the remark
of

Procopius himself, that it always spread from the sea-coast to the inland
country;

the most sequestered islands and mountains were successively visited; the
places

which had escaped the fury of its passage, were alone exposed to the contagion
of

the ensuing year. The winds might diffuse that subtle venom; but unless the
at­

mosphere be previously disposed for its reception, the plague would soon
expire

in the cold or temperate climates of the earth. Such was the universal corrup­

tion of the air, that the pestilence, which burst forth in the fifteenth year
of Jus­

tinian, was not checked or alleviated by any difference of the seasons. In
time, its

first malignity was abated and dispersed; the disease alternately languished
and

revived; but it was not till the end of a calamitous period of fifty-two
years, that

mankind recovered their health, or the air resumed its pure and salubrious
qua­

lity. No facts have been preserved to sustain an account, or even a
conjecture,

of the numbers that perished in this extraordinary mortality. I only find,
that

during three months, five, and at length, ten thousand persons died each day
at

Constantinople, that many cities of the east were left vacant, and that in
several

districts of Italy, the harvest and the vintage withered on the ground. The
tri­

ple scourge of war, pestilence, and famine, afflicted the subjects of
Justinian, and

his reign is disgraced by a visible decrease of the human species, which has
never

been repaired in some of the fairest countries of the globe. (4)

(1) It was thui that Socrates had been saved by his temperance, in the plague
of Athens. (Aul. Gelliut,

Noc. Attie. 2.1.) Dr. Mead accounts for the peculiar salubrity of religious
houses, by the two advantages of

seclusion and abstinence (p. 18,19.)

(3) Mead proves that the plague is contagious, from Thucydides, Lucretius,
Aristotle, Galen, and common

experience, (p. 10—SO.;) and he refutes (Preface, p. 2—13.) the contrary
opinion of the French physicians who

visited Marseilles in the year 1720. Yet these were the recent and enlightened
spectators of a plague which,

in a few months, swept away fifty thousand inhabitants (sur la Peste de
Marseille, Paris, 1786.) or a city that, in

the present hour of prosperity and trade, contains no more than ninety
thousand souls (Neeker, sur les Fi­

nances, torn. i. p. 231.)

(3) The strong assertions of Procopius—iwrs yap (xrpw cut, yxp i?i*Tt{—are
overthrown by the subsequent

experience of Evagrios.

(4) After some figures of rhetoric, the sands of the sea, &c. Procopius
(Anecdot. c. 18.) attempts a more de­

finite account: that j*up*»j»v /a>»«c,- had been exterminated and er the reign
of the imperial demon.

"The expression is obscure in grammar and arithmetic, and a literal
interpretation would produce several mil­

lions of millions. Aleroannus (p. 80.,) and Cousin (torn. iii. p. 178..)
translate this passage u two hundred mil­

lions;" bnwl am ignorant of their motives. If we drop the iMfx Y*,-, the
remaining pvpiKSagp juvcix r, a myriad

«f>myriads, wouldI furnish one hundred millions, a number not wholly
inadmissible.

