110 THE DECLINE AND FALL

Trent and Verona. The banners of Narses soon approached the Vulturnus, and

the eyes of Italy were anxiously fixed on the event of this final contest.
Perhaps the

talents of the Roman general were most conspicuous in the calm operations
which

precede the tumult of a battle. His skilful movements intercepted the subsist­

ence of the barbarian, deprived him of the advantage of the bridge and river,

and, in the choice of the ground and moment of action, reduced him to comply

■with the inclination of his enemy. On the morning of the important day, when

the ranks were already formed, a servant, for some trivial fault, was killed
by his

master, one of the leaders of the Heruli. The justice or passion of Narses was

awakened: he summoned the offender to his presence, and, without listening to

his excuses, gave the signal to the minister of death. If the cruel master had

not infringed the laws of his nation, this arbitrary execution was not less
unjust,

than it appears to have been imprudent. The Heruli felt the indignity; they

halted: but the Roman general, without soothing their rage, or expecting their

resolution, called aloud, as the trumpets sounded, that unless they hastened
to oc­

cupy their place, they would lose the honour of the victory. His troops were
dis­

posed in a long front, the cavalry on the wings; in the centre, the heavy-
armed

foot; the archers-and slingers in the rear. The Germans advanced in a sharp

pointed column, of the form of a triangle or solid wedge. They pierced the
feeble

ceptre of Narses, who received them with a smile into the fatal snare, and
directed

his wings of cavalry insensibly to wheel on their flanks and encompass the
rear.

The hosts of the Franks and Alemanni consisted of infantry: a sword and
buckler

hung by their side, and they used, as their weapons of offence, a weighty
hatchet,

and hooked javelin, which were only formidable in close combat, or at a short
dis­

tance.^) The flower of the Roman archers, on horseback, and in complete ar­

mour, skirmished without peril round this immoveable phalanx; supplied by ac­

tive speed the deficiency of number; and aimed their arrows against a crowd of

barbarians, who instead of a cuirass and helmet, were covered by a loose
garment

.of fur or linen. They paused, they trembled, their ranks were confounded, and

in the decisive moment the Heruli, preferring glory to revenge, charged with
ra­

pid violence the head of the column. Their leader, Sindbal, and Aligern, the

Gothic prince, deserved the prize of superior valour; and their example
incited

the victorious troops to achieve with swords and spears the destruction of the
ene­

my. Buccelin, and the greatest part of his army, perished on the field of
battle,

in the waters of Vulturnus, or by the hands of the enraged peasants; but it
may

seem incredible that a victory,(2) which no more than five of the Alemanni
sur­

vived, could be purchased with the loss of fourscore Romans. Seven thousand

Goths, the relics of the war, defended the fortress of Campsa till the ensuing

spring; and every messenger of Narses announced the reduction of the Italian
ci­

ties, whose names were corrupted by the ignorance or vanity of the Greeks. (3)

After the battle of Casilinum, Narses entered the capital; the arms and
treasures

of the Goths, the Franks and Alemanni, were displayed; his soldiers, with gar­

lands in their hands, chanted the praises of the conqueror; and Rome, for the
last

time, beheld the semblance of a triumph.

After a reign of sixty years, the throne of the Gothic kings was filled by the
ex­

archs of Ravenna, the representatives in peace and war of the emperor of the
Ro­

mans. Their jurisdiction was soon reduced to the limits of,a narrow province:

but Narses himself, the first and most powerful of the exarcfis",-
administered about

fifteen years the entire kingdom of Italy. Like Belisarius, he had deserved
the

honours of envy, calumny, and disgrace: but the favourite eunuch still enjoyed

the confidence of Justinian, or the leader of a victorious army awed and
repressed

the ingratitude of a timid court. Yet it was not by weak and mischievous
indul­

gence that Narses secured the attachment of his troops. Forgetful of the past,

and regardless of the future, they abused the present hour of prosperity and
peace.

The cities of Italy resounded with the noise of drinking and dancing: the
spoils of

victory were wasted in sensual pleasures; and nothing (says Agathias)
remained,

unless to exchange their shields and helmets for the soft lute and capacious
hogs-

(1) Pere Daniel (Hist, dela Milice Fnwcoise, torn. i. p. 17—21.) has exhibited
a fanciful representation sf

this battle, somewhat in the manner of the chevalier Folard.the once famous
editor of Polybiul, who fashioned

to his own habits and opinions all the military operations of antiquity.

(2) Agathias (lib. ii. p. 47.) has produced a Greek epirram of six lines on
this victory of Narses, which is fa-,

vourably compared to the battles of Marathon aud Plataea. The_ chief
difference is indeed in their conse­

quences—so triviaMn the former instance—so permanent and glorious in the
latter.

(3) The Beroi and Brincas of Theophanes, or his transcriber (p. 201.) mast be
read or understood Verona

and Brixia,

