OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 3f5

mise of the flowers and fruits of a plentiful increase. Their hope is seldom
de­

ceived; but the riches which they extract from the wheat, the barley, and the

rice, the legumes, the fruit trees, and the cattle, are unequally shared
between

those who labour and those who possess- According to the vicissitudes of the
sea­

sons, the face of the country is adorned with a silver wave, a verdant
emerald,

and the deep yellow of a golden harvest. "(1) Yet this beneficial order is
some­

times interrupted; and the long delay and sudden swell of the river in the
first

year of the conquest might afford some colour to an edifving fable. It is
said, that

the annual sacrifice of a virgin,(2) had been interdicted by the piety of
Omar; and

that the Nile lay sullen and inactive in his shallow bed, till the mandate of
the ca­

liph was cast into the obedient stream, which rose in a single night to the
height of

sixteen cubits. The admiration of the Arabs for their new conquest encouraged
the

license of their romantic spirit. We may read, in the gravest authors, that
Egypt

was crowded with twenty thousand cities or villages,(3) that exclusive of the

Greeks and Arabs, the Copts alone were found on the assessment, six millions
of

tributary subjects,(4) or twenty millions of either sex, and of every age:
that three

hundred millions of gold or silver were annually paid to the treasury of the
ca­

liph. (5) Our reason must be startled by these extravagant assertions; and
they

will become more palpable, if we assume the compass and measure to the extent

of habitable ground; a valley from the tropic to Memphis, seldom broader than

twelve miles, and the triangle of the Delta, a flat surface of two thousand
one hun­

dred square leagues, compose a twelfth part of the magnitude of France. (6) A

more accurate research will justify a more reasonable estimate. The three hun­

dred millions, created by the error of a scribe, are reduced to the decent
revenue

of four millions three hundred thousand pieces of gold, of which nine hundred
thou­

sand were consumed by the pay of the soldiers. (7) Two authentic lists, of the

present and of the twelfth century, are circumscribed within the respectable
num­

ber of two thousand seven hundred villages and towns. (8) After a long
residence

at Cairo, a French consul has ventured to assign about four millions of
Mahome­

tans, Christians, and Jews, for the ample, though not incredible, scope of the
po­

pulation of Egypt (9)

(1) In a twenty years* residence at Cairo, the consul Maillet had contemplated
that varying scene, the Nile

(lettre 2. p. 70. 75,;) particularly the fertility of the land (lettre 9.)
From a college at Cambridge, the poetic

eye of Gray had teen the same objects with a keener glance:—

What wonder in the sultry climes that spread,

Where Nile, redundant o'er his summer bed, '

From his broad borom life and verdure flings,

And broods o'er Egypt with his wat'ry wings;

If with advent'roiis oar, and ready sail,

The dusky people drive before the gale:

Or on frail floats to neighbouring cities ride,

That rise and glitter o'er the ambient tide.

(Mason's Works, and Memoirs of Gray, p. 199,200.)

(2) See Murtadi, p. 164—167. The reader will not easily credit a human
sacrifice under the Christian em*

peron, or a miracle of the successors of Mahomet.

(3) Maillet, description de 1'Egypte, p. 22. He mentions this number as the
common opinion; and adds, that

the generality of these villages contain two or three thousand persons, and
that many of them are more popu­

lous than onr large cities.

(4) Kutvch. Annal. torn. ii. p. 308.311. The twenty millions are computed from
the following data: one*

twelfth of mankind above sixty, one-third below sixteen, the proportion of men
to women as seventeen to six­

teen. (Recbercbes sur la Population de la France, p. H} 72.) The president
Gogaet (Origin des Arts, &c.

torn. iii. p. 20, Sec.) bestows twenty-seven millions on ancient Egypt,
because the seventeen hundred compa­

nions of Sesostris were born on the same day.

(5) El niacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 218. and this gross lump is swallowed without
scruple by d'Herbelot, (Bibliot.

Orient, p. 1031.) Arbuthnot, (Tablfsof Ancient Coins, p. 262.) and de Guigne*.
(Hist, det Huns, torn. iii. p.

135.) They might allege the not less extravagant liberality of Appian in
favour of the Ptolemies (in prsef.) of/

seventv-four myriads, seven hundred and forty thousand talents, an annual
income of a hundred and eighty-

five, or near three hundred millions of pounds sterling, according as we
reckon by the Egyptian or the Alexan­

drian talent. (Bernard de Ponderibus Antiq. p. 186.)

(6) See the measurement of d'Anville. (Mem. sur 1'Egypte, p. 23, Sec.) After
some peevish cavils, M. Pauw

(Recherche* sur les Egyptiens, torn. i. p. 118—121.) can only enlarge his
reckoning to two thousand two hun­

dred and fifty square leagues.

(7) Renauaot, Hist. Patriarch. Alexand. p. 334. who calls the common reading
or version of Elmacin, error

librarii* His own emendation of four million three hundred thousand pieces, in
the ninth century, maintains a

probable medium between the three millions which the Arabs acquired by the
conquest of Egypt, (idem, p. 168.)

and the two million four hundred thousand which the sultan of Constantinople
levied in the last century. (Pie-

tro della valle, torn. i. p. 352. Thevenor, part i. p. 824.) Pauw (Recberches,
torn. ii. p. 365—373.) gradually

raises the revenue of the Pharaohs, the Ptolemies, and the Caesars, from six
to fifteen millions of German

crown*. *J

(8) The list of Schultens (Index Geograph. ad Calcem Vir. Saladin. p. 5.)
contains two thousand three hun­

dred and ninety-six places; that of d'Anville, (Mem. sur 1'Egypte, p. 29.)
from the divan of Cairo, enumerates

two thousand six hundred and ninety-six.

(O) See Maillet, (Description de 1'Egypte, p. 28.) who seems to argue with
candour and judgment. Iam

much better satisfied with the observations than with the reading of the
French consul. He was itrnorant of

Greek and Latin literature, and his fancy is too much delighted with the
fictions of the Arabs. Their best

