AS THE DECLINE AND FALL

ducts were made impervious, and the mole or sepolchre of Hadrian(l) was ton*

verted, for the first time, to the use of a citadel. That venerable structure,
which

contained the ashes of the Antonines, was a circular turret rising from a
quadrangu­

lar basis: it was covered with the white marble of Paros, and decorated by the
sta­

tues of gods and heroes; and the lover of the arts must read with a sigh, that
the

works of Praxiteles or Lysippus were torn from their lofty pedestals, and
hurled

into the ditch on the heads or the besiegers. (2) To each of his lieutenants,
Be-

lisarius assigned the defence of a gate, with the wise and peremptory
instruction,

that whatever might be the alarm, they should steadilyadhere to their
respective

posts, and trust their general for the safety of Rome. The formidable host of
the

Goths, as insufficient to embrace the ample measure of the city; of the
fourteen

gates, seven only were invested from the Prsenestine to the Flaminian way;

and Vitiges divided his troop"? into six camps, each of which was fortified
with a

ditch ana rampart. On the Tuscan side of the river, a seventh encampment was

formed in the field or circus of the Vatican, for the important purpose of
command­

ing the Milvian bridge and the course of the Tiber; but they approached with
de­

votion the adjacent church of St. Peter; and the threshold of the holy
apostles

was respected during the siege by a Christian enemy. In the ages of victory.
as

often as the senate decreed some distant conquest, the consul denounced
hostili­

ties, by unbarring, in solemn pomp, the gates of the temple of Janus. (3) Do­

mestic war now rendered the admonition superfluous, and the ceremony was su­

perseded by the establishment of a new religion. But the brazen temple of
Janus

■was left standing in the forum, of a size sufficient only to contain the
statue of the

god, five cubits in height, of a human form, but with two faces, directed to
the

east and west. The double gates were likewise of brass; and a fruitless effort
to ■

turn them on their rusty hinges, revealed the scandalous secret, that some
Romans

■were still attached to the superstition of their ancestors.

Eighteen days were employed by the besiegers, to provide all the instruments

of attack which antiquity had invented. Fascines were prepared to fill the
ditches,

scaling ladders to ascend the walls. The largest trees of the forest supplied
the

timbers of four battering rams; their.heads were armed with iron; they were

suspended by ropes, and each of them was worked by the labour of fifty men.

The lofty wooden turrets moved on wheels or rollers, and formed a spacious

platform of the level of the rampart. On the morning of the nineteenth day, a

general attack was made from the Prsnestine gate to the Vatican: seven Go­

thic columns, with their military engines, advanced to the assault; and the
Rb-

mans who lined the ramparts, listened with doubt and anxiety to the cheerful
as­

surances of their commander. As soon as the enemy approached the ditch, Beli-

sarius himself drew the first arrow; and such was his strength and dexterity,
that

he transfixed the foremost of the barbarian leaders. A shout of applause and*

victory was re-echoed along the wall. He drew a second arrow, and the stroke
was

followed with the same success and the same acclamation. The Roman general

then gave the word, that the archers should aim at the teams of oxen; they
were

instan#y covered with mortal wounds; the towers which they drew, remained use­

less and immoveable, and a single moment disconcerted the laborious projects
of

the king of the Goths. After this disappointment, Vitiges still continued, or

feigned to continue, the assault of the Salarian gate, that he might divert
the at­

tention of his adversary, while his principal forces more strenuously attacked
the

Prscnestine gate and the sepulchre of Hadrian, at the distance of three miles
from

each other. Near the former, the double walls of the Vivarium (4) were low or

broken; the fortifications of the latter were feebly guarded: the vigour of
the

Goths was excited by the hope of victory and spoil; and if a single post had
given

way, the Romans, and Rome itself, were irrecoverably lost. This perilous day
was

the most glorious in the life of Belisarius. Amidst tumult and dismay, the
whole

plan of the attack and defence was distinctly present to his mind; he observed
the

fl) The description of ibis mausoleum, or mole, in Procopius, (lib. i. c. 25.)
ii the first and best. The height

above the vails <r%sSev s? xifloo fi»\w. On Nolli's great plan, the sides
measure two hundred and sixty English

feet.

(2) Praxiteles excelled in Fauns, and that of Athens was his own master-piece.
Rome now contains above

thirty of the same character. When the ditch of St. Angelo was cleansed under
Urban VIII., the workmen

found the sleeping Faun of the Barberini palace: but a leg,a thigh, and the
right arm, had been broken from

that beautiful statue. (Winckelraan, Hist, de 1'Art, torn. ii. p. 52,53. torn.
iii. p. 265.)

(3) Procopius has riven the best description of the temple of Janus, a
national deity of Latium. (Heyne,

Excurs. 5. ad lib. 7. JEneid.) It was once a gate in the primitive city of
Romulus ana Numa. (Naraini, p.

13. 256. 329.) Virgil has described the ancient rite, like a poet and an
antiquarian.

(4) rhwrium was an angle in the new wall, enclosed for wild beasts.
(Procopius, Goth. lib. i. c.S3.) Tire

•pot it still TiiibJe in Nardini (lib. iv. c. 2. p. 159,160.,) and Nolli's
great plan of Rome.

