OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 17$

-Abyssinia beyond the Red Sea; and a native prince of the ancient.Homerites was  
restored to the throne as the vassal or viceroy of the great Nushirvan.^1) But

the nephew of Justinian declared his resolution to avenge the injuries of.his
Chris­

tian ally, the prince of Abyssinia, as they suggested a decent pretence to
discon­

tinue the annual tribute, which was poorly disguised by the name of pension.
The

churches of Persarmenia were oppressed by the intolerant spirit of the Magi;
they

secretly invoked the protection of the Christians, and after the pious murder
of their

satraps, the rebels were allowed and supported as the brethren and subjects of
the

Roman emperor. The complaints of Nushirvan were disregarded by the Byzan­

tine court; Justin yielded to the importunities of the Turks, who offered an
alliance

against the common enemy; and the Persian monarchy was threatened at the

same instant by the united forces of Europe, of Ethiopia, and of Scythia. At

the age of fourscore, the sovereign of the east would perhaps have chosen the

peaceful enjoyment of his glory and greatness; but as soon as war became ine­

vitable, he took the field with the alacrity of youth, whilst the aggressor
trem­

bled in the palace of Constantinople. Nushirvan, or Chosroes, conducted in
per­

son the siege of Dara; and although that important fortress had been left
destitute

of troops and magazines, the valour of the inhabitants resisted above five
months

the archers, the elephants, and the military engines of the great king. In the

meanwhile his general Adarman advanced from Babylon, traversed the desert,

passed the Euphrates, insulted the suburbs of Antioch, reduced to ashes the
city,

of Apamea, and laid the spoils of Syria at the feet of his master, whose
perseve­

rance, in the midst of winter, at length subverted the bulwark of the east.
But

these losses, which astonished the provinces and the court, produced a
salutary

■effect in the repentance and abdication of the emperor Justin; a new spirit
arose in

the Byzantine councils; and a truce of three years was obtained by the
prudence

of Tiberius. That seasonable interval was employed in the preparations of war;

and the voice of rumour proclaimed to the world, that from the distant
countries

of the Alps and the Rhine, from Scythia, Mxsia, Pannonia, Illyricum, and Isau-

Tia, the strength of the imperial cavalry was re-enforced with one hundred and

fifty thousand soldiers. Yet the king of Persia, without fear, or without
faith, re­

solved to prevent the attack of the enemy; again passed the Euphrates, and
dis­

missing the ambassadors of Tiberius, arrogantly commanded them to await his
ar­

rival at Cxsarea, the metropolis of the Cappadocian provinces. The two armies

encountered each other in the battle of Melitene; the barbarians, who darkened

the air with a cloud of arrows, prolonged their line, and extended their wings

across the plain; while the Romans, in deep and solid bodies, expected to
prevail

in closer action, by the weight of the swords and lances. A Scythian chief,
who

commanded their right wing, suddenly turned the flank of the enemy, attacked

their rear-guard in the presence of Chosroes, penetrated to the midst of the
camp,

pillaged the royal tent, profaned the eternal fire, loaded a train of camels
with

the spoils of Asia, cut his way through the Persian host, and returned with
songs

of victory to his friends; who had consumed the day in single combats, or
inef­

fectual skirmishes. The darkness of the night, and the separation of the
Romans,

afforded the Persian monarch an opportunity of revenge; and one of their camps

was swept away by a rapid and impetuous assault. But the review of his loss,

and the consciousness of his danger, determined Chosroes to a speedy retreat;
he

burnt, in his passage, the vacant town of Melitene; and, without consulting
the

safety of his troops, boldly swam the Euphrates on the back of an elephant.
After

this unsuccessful campaign, the want of magazines, and perhaps some inroad of

the Turks, obliged him to disband or divide his forces; the Romans were left
mas­

ters of the field, and their general Justinian, advancing to the relief of the
Persar-

menian rebels, erected his standard on the banks of the Araxes. The great Pom-

pey had formerly halted within three days' march of the Caspian :(2) that
inland

sea was explored for the first time, by a hostile fleet,(3) and seventy
thousand

(1) D'Herbelot, Biblioth. Orient, p. 477. Pocock, Specimen Hiit. Arabum. p.
84,65. Father Pagi (Critics,

tout. ii. p. 646.) has proved, that after ten years' peace, the Persian war,
which continued twenty years, was re­

newed A. D. 571. Mahomet was born A. D. 569; in the year of the elephant, or
the defeat of Abrahah (Gag-

nier Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 89, 90—98.;) and this account allows two
years fur the conquest of Yemen.

(2) He had vanquished the Albanians, who brought into the field twelve
thousand horse, and sixty thousand

foot; but he dreaded the multitude of venomous reptiles, whose existence may
admit of some doubt, at well as

that of the neighbouring Amazons. Plutarch, in Pompeio, torn. ii. p.
1105,1106.

(3) In the history of the world 1 can only receive two navies on the
Caspian.—1. Of the Macedonians, when

Patrocles, the admiral of the kings of Syria, Seleucus and Amiochui, descended
most probably the river Oxils,

from the confines of India (Plin, Hist. N»tur. vi. 310 2.. Of the Rusiiant,
when Peter I- conducted a fleet ana

