J.30 THE DECLINE AND FALL

pious fear, that Justinian, like Elijah or Romulus, would be snatched into the
air,

and translated alive to the mansions of celestial glory. (1)

If Caesar had achieved the reformation of the Roman law, his creative genius,

enlightened by reflection and study, would have given to the world a pure and

original system of jurisprudence. Whatever flattery might suggest, the emperor

of the east was afraid to establish his private judgment as the standard of
equity:

in the possession of legislative power, he borrowed the aid of time and
opinion; and

his laborious compilations are guarded by the sages and legislators of past
times.

Instead of a statue cast in a simple mould by the hand of an artist, the works
of

Justinian represent a tesselated pavement of antique and costly, but too often
of in­

coherent fragments. In the first year of his reign, he directed the faithful
Tribo­

nian, and nine learned associates, to revise the ordinances of his
predecessors, as

they were contained, since the time of Hadrian, in the Gregorian, Hermogenian,

and Theodosian codes; to purge the errors and contradictions, to retrench
what­

ever was obsolete or superfluous, and to select the wise and salutary laws
best

adapted to the practice of the tribunals and the use of his subjects. The work

was accomplished in fourteen months; and the twelve books or tables, which the

new decemvirs produced, might be designed to imitate the labours of their
Roman

predecessors. The new code of Justinian was honoured with his name, and con­

firmed by his royal signature: authentic transcripts were multiplied by the
pens of

notaries and scribes, they were transmitted to the magistrates of the
European,

the Asiatic, and afterwards the African provinces: and the law of the empire
was

proclaimed on solemn festivals at the doors of churches. A more arduous opera­

tion was still behind:, to extract the spirit of jurisprudence from the
decisions and

conjectures, the questions and disputes of the Roman civilians. Seventeen law­

yers, with Tribonian at their head, were appointed by the emperor to exercise

an absolute jurisdiction over the works of their predecessors. If they had
obeyed

his commands in ten years, Justinian would have been satisfied with their
diligence;

and their rapid composition of the digest or fandects,(2) in three years, will

deserve praise or censure, according to the merit of the execution.. From the
li­

brary of Tribonian, they chose forty, the most eminent civilians of former
times :(3)

two thousand treatises were comprised in an abridgment of fifty books; and it
has

been carefully recorded, that three millions of lines or sentences, (4) were
reduced,

in this abstract, to the moderate number of one hundred and fifty thousand.
The

edition of this great work was delayed a month after that of the institutes;
and

it seemed reasonable that the elements should precede the digest of the Roman

law. As soon as the emperor had approved their labours, he ratified, by his
le­

gislative power, the speculations of these private citizens i their
commentaries on

the twelve tables, the perpetual edict, the laws of the people, and the
decrees of

the senate, succeeded to the authority of the text; and tne text was
abandoned, as

a useless, though venerable, relic of antiquity. The Cade, the Pandects, and
the

Institutes, were declared to be the legitimate system of civil jurisprudence;
they

alone were admitted in the tribunals, and they alone were taught in the
academies

of Rome, Constantinople, and Berytus. Justinian addressed to the senate and

provinces his eternal oracles; and his pride, under the mask of piety,
ascribed

the consummation of this great design to the support and inspiration of the
Deity.

(0 ,Thi» story is related by Hesycbius (de Viris IHustribns,) Procopius
(Anecdot. c. xiii.,) and Suidas (torn. UW

p. SOI.) Such flattery is incredible!

Nihil est quod credere de se

Non potent cum laudator Diis sequa potestas.

Firtitenelle (torn. i. p. 32—39.} has ridiculed the impudence of the modest
Virgil. But the same Fontenelle

places the king above the divine Augustus; and the sage Boileau has not
blushed to say—11 Le destin a ses yeux

n'oseroit balancer." Yet neither Augustus nor Louis XIV. were fools.

(2) n«v5£icT!et (general receivers) was a common title of the Greek
miscellanies (Plin. Preefat. ad Hist. Natur.)

The digesta of Scaavola, Marcellinus, and Celsus, were already familiar to the
civilians: but Justinian was in

the wrong when he used the two appellations as synonymous. Is the word
Pandects Greek or Latin—mascu­

line or feminine ? The diligent Brenckman will not presume to decide these
momentous controversies 'Hist.

Pandect, p. 300—304.)

(3) Angelus Politianus (lib. v. Epist. ult.) reckons thirty-seven (p.
192—200.)<ivilians quoted in the Pandects

—a learned, and, for his times, an extraordinary list. The Greek Index to the
Pandects enumerates thirty-

nine; and forty are produced by the indefatigable Fabricius (Bibliot.
Grjec.toro. iii. p. 488—502.) Antoninus

Augustus (de Korainibus Propfiis; Pandeet. apud Ludewig, p. 283.) is said to
have added fifty-four names; but

they, must be vague or second-hand references.

(4) TheSTtajoi of the ancients MSS. may be strictly defined as sentences or
periods of a complete sense, which,

•n the breadth of the parchment rolls or volumes, composed as many lines of
unequal length. The number ot*

£ri£*i in each hook served as a check on the errors of the scribes (Ludfewig,
p. 311—215. and his original au­

thor Suicer. Thesaur. Ecclesiast. torn. i. p.'1021—1036.)

