OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 599

tlence of surmounting all opposition either of nature or of man. His first
care

was to suppress a domestic rebel, who commanded the most important passes of

the Pyrenees: Munuza, a Moorish chief, had accepted the alliance of the duke
of

Aquitain; and Eudes, from a motive of private or public interest, devoted his

beauteous daughter to the embraces of the African misbeliever. But the strong­

est fortresses of Cerdagne were invested by a superior force: the rebel was
over­

taken and slain in the mountains; and his widow was sent a captive to
Damascus,

to gratify the desires, or more probably the vanity of the commander of the
faith­

ful. From the Pyrenees, Abderame preceeded without delay to the passage of

the Rhone and the siege of Aries. An army of Christians attempted the relief

of the city: the tombs of their leaders were yet visible in the thirteenth
century;

and many thousands of their dead bodies were carried down the rapid stream

into the Mediterranean sea. The arms of Abderame were not less successful on

the side of the ocean. He passed without opposition the Garonne and Dordogne,

which unite their waters in the gulf of Bordeaux; but he found, beyond those

rivers, the camp of the intrepid Eudes, who had formed a second army, and sus­

tained a second defeat, so fatal to the Christians, that, according to their
sad con­

fession, God alone could reckon the number of the slain. The victorious
Saracen

overran the provinces of Aquitain, whose Gallic names are disguised, rather
than

lost, in the modern appellations of Perigord, Saintogne, and Poitou: his
standards

were planted on the walls, or at least before the gates of Tours and of Sens;
and his

detachments overspread the kingdom of Burgundy as far as the well-known cities

of Lyons and Besaneon. The memory of these devastations, for Abderame did

not spare the country or the people, was long preserved by tradition; and the
in­

vasion of France by the Moors, or Mahometans, affords the ground-work of those

fables, which have been so wildly disfigured in the romance of chivalry, and
so

elegantly adorned by the Italian muse. In the decline of society and art, the
de­

serted cities could supply a slender booty to the Saracens; their richest
spoil was

found in the churches and monasteries, which they stripped of their ornaments

and delivered to the flames: and the tutelar saints, both Hilary of Poitiers
and

Martin of Tours, forgot their miraculous powers in the defence of their own
se­

pulchres.(1) A victorious line of march had been prolonged above a thousand

miles from the rock of Gibraltar to the banks of the Loire; the repetition of
an

equal space would have carried the Saracens to the confines of Poland and the

Highlands of Scotland: the Rhine is not more impassable than the Nile or Eu­

phrates, and the Arabian fleet might have sailed without a naval combat into
the

mouth of the Thames. Perhaps the interpretation of the Koran would now be

taught in the schools of Oxford, and her pulpits might demonstrate to a
circum­

cised people the sanctity and truth of the revelation of Mahomet. (2)

From such calamities was Christendom delivered by the genius and fortune of

one man. Charles, the illegitimate son of the elder Pepin, was content with
the title

of mayor or duke of the Franks, but he deserved to become the father of a line
of

kings. In a laborious administration of twenty-four years he restored and
support­

ed the dignity of the throne, and the rebels of Germany and Gaul were
successive­

ly crushed by the activity of a warrior, who, in the same campaign, could
display

Iris banner on the Elbe, the Rhone, and the shores of the ocean. In the public
dan­

ger, he was summoned by the voice of his country; and his rival, the duke of
Aqui­

tain, was reduced to appear among the fugitives and suppliants. " Alas!
"exclaimed

the Franks, " what a misfortune! what an indignity! We have long heard of the

name and conquests of the Arabs: we were apprehensive of their attack from the

east; thev have now conquered Spain, and invade our country, on the side of
the

west. Yet their numbers, and,"since they have no buckler, "their arms, are

inferior to our own. If you follow my advice," replied the prudent mayor of
the

palace, " you will not interrupt their march, nor precipitate your attack.
They

are like a torrent, which it is dangerous to stem in its career. The thirst of
riches,

and the consciousness of success, redouble their valour, and valour is of more
avail

(1) With regard tothe sanctuary of St. Martin of Tours, Roderie Ximenes
accuses the Saracens of theota/.

Turonis civitatem.ecclesiam et palatia vastatione et incendio simili diruit ft
consumpsif. The continuator of

Kredegarius imputes to them no more than the intention. Ad domum beafissimi
Martini cvertendam (lestinanr.

At Carolus, ccc. The French annalist was more jealous of the honour of the
saint.

(2) Yet I sincerely doubt whether the Oxford mosch would hare produced a
volume of controversy so elegant

and ingenious as the sermons lately preached by Mr. White, the Arabic
professor, at Mr. Bampton's lecture.

I lis observations on the character and religion of Mahomet are always adapted
to his argument, and generally

fouatted in truth and reason. He sustains the part of a lively anil eloquent
advocate, and sometimes rises fcr

the merit of an historian ami philosopher.

