OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

first license of his youth, Basil II. devoted his life, in the palace and the
camp, to

the penance of a hermit, wore the monastic habit under his robes and armour,
ob­

served a vow of continence, and imposed on his appetites a perpetual
abstinence

from wine and flesh. In the sixty-eighth year of his age, his martial spirit
urged

him to embark in person for a holy war against the Saracens of Sicily; he was
pre­

vented by death, and Basil, surnamed the slayer of the Bulgarians, was
dismissed

from the world, with the blessings of the clergy and the curses of the people.
After

his decease, his brother Constantine enjoyed, about three years, the power, or

rather the pleasures, of royalty; and his only care was the settlement of his
suc­

cession. He had enjoyed sixty-six years the title of Augustus; and the reign
of

the two brothers is the longest, and most obscure, of the Byzantine history.

A lineal succession of five emperors in a period of one hundred and sixty
years,

had attached the loyalty of the Greeks to the Macedonian dynasty, which had

been thrice respected by the usurpers of their power. After the death of Con­

stantine IX., the last male of the royal race, a new and broken scene
presented it­

self, and the accumulated years of twelve emperors do not equal the space of
his

single reign. His elder brother had preferred his private chastity to the
public

interest,, and Constantine himself had only three daughters, Eudocia, who took
the

veil, and Zoe and Theodora, who were preserved till a mature age in a state of

ignorance and virginity. When their marriage was discussed in the council of

their dying father, the cold or pious Theodora refused to give an heir to the
em­

pire, but her sister Zoe presented herself a willing victim at the altar.
Romanus

Argyrus, a patrician of a graceful person and fair reputation, was chosen for
her

husband, and on his declining that honour, was informed, that blindness or
death

Was the second alfernative. The motive of his reluctance was conjugal
affection;

but his faithful wife sacrificed her own happiness to his safety and
greatness; and

her entrance into a monastery removed the only bar to the imperial nuptials.
Af­

ter the decease of Constantine, the sceptre devolved to Romanus III., but his
la­

bours at home and abroad were equally feeble and fruitless; and the mature
age,

the forty-eight years of Zoe, were less favourable to the hopes of pregnancy
than

to the indulgence of pleasure. Her favourite chamberlain was a handsome Paph-

lagonian of the name of Michael, whose first trade had been that of a money-
chan^

ger; and Romanus, either from gratitude or equity, connived at their criminal
in­

tercourse, or accepted a slight assurance of their innocence. But Zoe soon
justi­

fied the Roman maxim, that every adulteress is capable of poisoning her
husband;

and the death of Romanus was instantly followed by the scandalous marriage and

elevation of Michael IV. The expectations of Zoe were, however, disappointed;

instead of a vigorous and grateful lover, she had placed in her bed a
miserable

wretch, whose health and reason were impaired bv epileptic fits, and whose
con­

science was tormented by despair and remorse. The most skilful physicians of

the mind and body were summoned to his aid; and his hopes were amused by fre­

quent pilgrimages to the baths, and to the tombs of the most popular saints:
the

monks applauded his penance, and, except restitution (but to whom should he
have

restored?) Michael sought every method of expiating his guilt. While he
groaned

and prayed in sackcloth and ashes, his brother, the eunuch John, smiled at his
re­

morse, and enjoyed the harvest of a crime of which himself was the secret and

most guilty author. His administration was only the art of satiating his
avarice,

and Zoe became a captive in the palace of her fathers and in the hands of her

slaves. When he perceived the irretrievable decline of his brother's health,
he

introduced his nephew,-another Michael, who derived his surname of Calaphates

from his father's occupation in the careening of vessels: at the command of
the

eunuch, Zoe adopted for her son the son of a mechanic; and the fictitious heir
was

invested with the title and purple of the Ciesars, in the presence of the
senate and

clergy. So feeble was the characterof Zoe, that she was oppressed by the
liberty

and power which he recovered by the death of the Paphlagonian; and at the end
of

four days, she placed the crown on the head of Michael V., who had protested,

with tears and oaths, that he should ever reign the first and most obedient of
hey

subjects. The only act of his short reign was his base ingratitude to his
benefactors,

the eunuch and the empress. The disgrace of the former was pleasing to the
pub­

lic; but the murmurs, and at length the clamours, of Constantinople deplored
the

exile of Zoe, the daughter of'so many emperors; her vices were forgotten, and

Michael was taught, that there is a period in which the patience of the tamest

slaves rises into fury and revenge. The citizens of everv degree assembled in
a.

Vol. III. 33

