OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

Belisarius disarmed, and naked, in the palace of Constantinople. Not a hope

could be entertained of shaking his long-tried fidelity; and they justly
dreaded the

revenge, or rather justice, of the veteran general, who might speedily
assemble

an army in Thrace to punish the assassins, and perhaps to enjoy the fruits of
their

crime. Delay afforded time for rash communications and honest confessions: Ar-

taban and his accomplices were condemned by the senate, but the extreme cle­

mency of Justinian detained them in the gentle confinement of the palace, till
he

pardoned their flagitious attempt against his throne and life. If the emperor
for­

gave his enemies, he must cordially embrace a friend whose victories were
alone

remembered, and who was endeared to his prince by the recent circumstance of

their common danger. Belisarius reposed from his toils, in the high station of
ge­

neral of the east and count of the domestics; and the older consuls and
patricians

respectfully yielded the precedency of rank to the peerless merit of the first
of

the Romans. (1) The first of the Romans still-submitted to be the slave of his

wife; but the servitude of habit and affection became less disgraceful when
the

death of Theodora had removed the baser influence of fear. Joannina their ,

daughter, and the sole heiress of their fortunes, was betrothed to Anastasius,
the

grandson, or rather nephew of the empress,(2) whose kind interposition
forward­

ed the consummation of their youthful loves. But the power of Theodora ex­

pired, the parents of Joannina returned, and her honour, perhaps her happi­

ness, were sacrificed to the revenge of an unfeeling mother, who dissolved the

imperfect nuptials before they had been ratified by the ceremonies of the

church.(3)

Before the departure of Belisarius, Perusia was besieged, and few cities were

impregnable to the Gothic arms. Ravenna, Ancona, and Crotona still resisted
the

barbarians; and when Totila asked in marriage one of the daughters of France,

he was stung by the just reproach, that the king of Italy was unworthy of his
title

till it was acknowledged by the Roman people. Three thousand of the bravest

soldiers had been left to defend the capital. On the suspicion of a monopoly,
they

massacred the governor, and announced to Justinian, by a deputation of the
cler­

gy, that unless their offence was pardoned, and their arrears were satisfied,
they

should instantly accept the tempting offers of Totila. But the officer, who
suc­

ceeded to the command (his name was Diogenes,) deserved their esteem and con­

fidence; and the Goths, instead of finding an easy conquest, encountered a
vigo­

rous resistance from the soldiers and people, who patiently endured the loss
of

the port, and of all maritime supplies. The siege of Rome would perhaps have

been raised, if the liberality of Totila to the Isaurians had not encouraged
some

of their venal countrymen to copy the example of treason. In a dark night,

while the Gothic trumpet sounded on another side, they silently opened the
gate

of St. Paul: the barbarians rushed into the city, and the flying garrison was
inter­

cepted before they could reach the harbour of Centumcellx, A soldier trained
in

the school of Belisarius, Paul of Cilicia, retired with four hundred men to
the

mole of Hadrian. They repelled the Goths; but they felt the approach of
famine,

and their aversion to the taste of horse-flesh confirmed their resolution to
risk the

event of a desperate and decish 3 sally. But their spirit insensibly stooped
to the

offers of capitulation; they retrieved their arrears of pay, and preserved
their

arms and horses, by enlisting in the service of Totila; their chiefs, who
pleaded a

laudable attachment to their wives and children in the east, were dismissed
with

honour; and above four hundred enemies, who had taken refuge in the sanc­

tuaries, were saved by the clemency of the victor. He no longer entertained a

wish of destroying the edifices of Rome, (4) which he now respected as the
seat

(1) The honours of Belisarius are gladly commemorated by his secretary
(Procop. Goth. lib. iii. c. 35. lib. iv»

c 210 The title of STfucTn^o; is ill translated, at least in this instance, by
prsefectus prastorio; and to a mili­

tary character, magister militum is more proper and applicable (Ducange,
Gloss. Grace, p. 1458,1450.)

(2) Aleroannus (ad Hist. Arcanam, p. 83.,) Ducange (Families Byzant. p~98.,)
and Heineccius (Hist Juris Ci-

vilis, p. 434.,) all three represent Anastasius as the son of the daughter of
Theodora; and their opinion firmly

reposes on the ambiguous testimony of Procopius (Anccdot. c. 4,5.—SuyxrpiSaj
twice repeated.) And yet I

will remark, 1. That in the year 547. Theodora could scarcely have a grandson
of the age of puberty: 2*

That we are totally ignorant of this daughter and her husband; and, 3. That
Theodora concealed her bas­

tards, and that her grandson by Justinian would have been heir-apparent of the
empire.

(3) The Be^oT^jtweTa, or sins of the hero of Italy and after his return, are
manifested ajrxpxxxyvjme^ and most

probably swelled, bv the author of the Anecdotes (c. iv. 5.) The designs of
Antonina were favoured by the

fluctuating jurisprudence of Justinian. On the law of marriage and divorce,
that emperor was trochos versati-

lior (Heineccius. Element. Juris. Civil, ad Oi-dinem Pandect, p. 4. No. 233.)

(4) The Romans were still attached to the monuments of their ancestors: and
according to Procopius (Goth*

lib. iv. c. 22.,) the galley of Apneas, of a single tank of oars, twenty-five
feet in breadth, one hundred and

twenty in length, was preserved, entire in the navalia, near Monte Testaceo,
at the foot of the Aventine (Nat­

