*16 'l&E DECLINE; AliB FAlX

united and concealed by an oath of secrecy. After a bloody conflict, rthey
prevailed

in the province of Bahrein, along the Persian gulf: far and wide, the tribes
of the -

desert were subject to the sceptre, or rather to the sword, of Abu Said and
his son

Abu Taher; and these rebellious imams could muster in the field a hundred and

seven thousand fanatics. The mercenaries of the caliph were dismayed at the

approach of an enemy who neither asked nor accepted quarter; and the
difference

between them in fortitude and patience, is expressive of the change which
three

centuries of prosperity had effected In the character of the Arabians. Such

troops were discomfited in every action; the cities of Racca and Baalbec, of
Cufa

and Bassora, were taken and pillaged; Bagdad was filled with consternation;
and

the caliph trembled behind the veils of his palace. In a daring inroad beyond
the

Tigris, Abu Taher advanced to the gates of the capital with no more than five

hundred horse. By the special order of Moctader, the bridges had been broken

down, and the person or head of the rebel was expected every hour by the com­

mander of the faithful. His lieutenant, from a motive of fear or pity,
apprized

Abu Taher of his danger, and recommended a speedy escape. " Your master,"

«aid the intrepid Carmathian to the messenger, " is at the head of thirty
thousand

soldiers: three such men as these are wanting in his host;" at the same
instant,

turning to three of his companions, he commanded the first to plunge a dagger

into his breast, the second to leap into the Tigris, and the third to cast
himself

headlong down a precipice. They obeyed without a murmur. " Relate," con­

tinued the imam, " what you have seen: before the evening your general shall
be

chained among my dogs." Before the evening, the camp was surprised and the

menace was executed. The rapine of the Carmathians was sanctified by their

aversion to,the worship of Mecca; they robbed a caravan of pilgrims, and
twenty

thousand devout Moslems were abandoned on the burning sands to a death of

hunger and thirst. Another year they suffered the pilgrims to proceed without

interruption; but, in the festival of devotion, Abu Taher stormed the holy
city,

and trampled on the most venerable relics of the Mahometan faith. Thirty thou­

sand citizens and strangers were put to the sword; the sacred precincts were
pol­

luted by the burial of three thousand dead bodies; the well of Zemzem
overflowed

with blood; the golden spout was forced from its place; the veil of the Caaba
was

divided among these impious sectaries; and the black stone, the first monument

of the nation, was borne away in triumph to their capital. After this deed of
sa­

crilege and cruelty, they continued to infest the confines of Irak, Syria, and
Egypt;

but the vital principle of enthusiasm had withered at the root. Their scruples
or

their avarice again opened the pilgrimage of Mecca, and restored the black
stone

of the Caaba; and it is needless to inquire into what factions they were
broken, or

by whose swords they were finally extirpated. The sect of the Carmathians may

be considered as the second visible cause of the decline and fall of the
empire of

the caliphs.(l)

The third and most obvious cause was the weight and magnitude of the empire

itself. The caliph Almamon might proudly assert, that it was easier for him to

rule the east and the west, than to manage a chess board of two feet
square;(2)

yet I suspect, that in both those games he was guilty ofrnany fatal mistakes;
and

I perceive, that in the distant provinces the authority of the first and most
power­

ful of the Abbassides was already impaired. The analogy of despotism invests
the

representative with the full majesty of the prince; the division and balance
of

powers might relax the habits of obedience, might encourage the passive
subje'et

to inquire into the origin and administration of civil government. He who is
born

in the purple is seldom worthy to reign; but the elevation of a private man,
of a

peasant perhaps, or a slave, affords a strong presumption of his courage and
capa­

city. 'I he viceroy of a remote kingdom aspires to secure the property and
inhe­

ritance of his precarious trust; the nations must rejoice in the presence of
their

sovereign; and the command of armies and treasures are at once the object and
the

instrument of his ambition. A change was scarcely visible as long as the
lieute­

nants of the caliph were content with their vicarious title; while they
solicited for

themselves or their sons a renewal of the imperial grant, and still maintained
on

the coin, and in the public prayers, the name and prerogative of the commander

(0 For tlte sect of the Carmathians, consult Elraacin, (Hist. Saracen, p.
210—324. 229. 231. 238. 941. 2*3.)

Abnlpharagius, fDynast, p. 179—182.) Abulfcda. (Annal. Moslem, p. 218, 219,
&c. 245.285. 274) and d'Hfr-

lielot, (Bibliotheque Orientale,p. 259—258. B35.) I find some inconsistencies
of theoloiry and chronology, vhiju

i' wonld not be easy nor of much importance to reconcile.

t (2) Hyde, Syntagma nisrettatton. ii. T>. 57. in Hist. ShaWlinliJ.

