14 THE DECLIKE AND FALL

for the sole purpose of giving a date to the year, and a festival to the
people. But

the expenses of this festival, in which the wealthy and the vain aspired to
surpass

their 'predecessors, insensibly arose to the enormous sum of 80,000/.; the
wisest

senators declined a useless honour, which involved the certain ruin of their
fami­

lies; and to this reluctance I should impute the frequent chasms in the last
age of

the consular Fasti. The predecessors of Justinian had assisted from the public

treasures the dignity of the less opulent candidates; the avarice of that
prince pre-*

ferred the cheaper and more convenient method of advice and regulation.(l) Se­

ven processions or spectacles were the number to which his edict confined the
horse

and chariot-races, the athletic sports, the music, and pantomimes of the
theatre,

and the hunting of wild beasts; and small pieces of silver were discreetly
substi­

tuted to the gold medals, which had always excited tumult and drunkenness,
when

they were scattered with a profuse hand among the populace. Notwithstanding

these precautions and his own example, the succession of consuls finally
ceased in

the thirteenth year of Justinian, whose despotic temper might be gratified by
the

silent extinction of a title which admonished the Romans of their ancient
free­

dom.^) Yet the annual consulship still lived in the minds of the people: they

fondly expected its speedy restoration; they applauded the gracious
condescension

of successive princes, by whom it was assumed in the first year of their
reign; and

three centuries elapsed, after the death of Justinian, before that obsolete
dignity,

which had been suppressed by custom, could be abolished by law. (3) The imper­

fect mode of distinguishing each year by the name of a magistrate, was usually

supplied by the date of a permanent era: the creation of the world, according
to

the Septuagint version, was adopted by the Greeks;(4) and the Latins, since
the

age of Charlemagne, have computed their time from the birth of Christ. (5)

»

CHAPTER XLI.

Conquest of Justinian in the West.—Character and first Campaigns of
Belisarius.—He

invades and subdues the Vandal Kingdom of Africa.—His Triumph.—The Gothic

War.—He recovers Sicily, Naples, and Rome.—Siege of Rome by the Goths.—Their

Retreat and Losses.—Surrender of Ravenna.—Glory of Belisarius—His domestic

Shame and Misfortunes,

When Justinian ascended the throne, about fifty years after the fall of the

western empire, the kingdoms of the Goths and Vandals had obtained a solid,

and, as it might seem, a legal establishment, both in Europe and Africa. The
ti­

tles which Roman victory had inscribed, were erased with equal justice by the

sword of the barbarians; and their successful rapine derived a more venerable

sanction from time, from treaties, and from the oaths of fidelity, already
repeated

by a second or third generation of obedient subjects. Experience and
Christiani­

ty had refuted the superstitious hope, that Rome was founded by the gods to
reign

for ever over the nations of the earth. But the proud claim of perpetual and
in­

defeasible dominion which her soldiers could no longer maintain, was firmly
as­

serted by her statesmen and lawyers, whose opinions have been sometimes re-

(1) See the regulations of Justinian (Novell. 105.,) dated at Constantinople,
July 5, and addressed to Strite'

gins, treasurer of the empire.

(2) Procopius, iu Anecdot. c. 46. Aleman. p. 106. In the eighteenth year after
the consulship of Besilius,

according to the reckoning of Marcellinus, victor. Marius, &c, the secret
history was composed, and, in the

eyes of Procopius, the consulship was finally abolished.

(3) By I>eo the philosopher. (Novell. 94. A. D. 886—911.) See Pagi Dissertat.
Hypatiea, p. 325—362.) and

Ducange. (Gloss. Grsec. p. 1635, 1636.) Even the title was vilified;
consulates codicilli . . . vilescunt, says

the emperor himself. ;

(4) According to Julius African us, &c. the world was create*] the first of
September, five thousand five

hundred and eight years, three months, and twenty-fivc-days, before the birth
of Christ; (see Pezron, Anti-

qnite des Terns defendue, p. 20—28.) and this era has been used by the Greeks,
the Oriental Christians, and

even by the Russians, till the reign of P*?ter I. The period, however
arbitrary, is clear and convenient. Of

the seven thousand two hundred and ninety-six years, which are supposed to
elapse since the creation, we

shall find three thousand of ignorance and darkness; two thousand either
fabulous or doubtful; one thousand

of ancient history, commencing with the Persian empire, and the Republics of
Rome and Athens; one thou­

sand from the fall of the Roman empire in the west, to the discovery of
America; and the remaining two hun­

dred and ninety-six will almost complete three centuries of the modern state
of Europe and mankind. I re­

gret this chronology, so far preferable to our double and perplexed method of
counting backward and forward

the years before and after the Christian era.

(5) The era of the world has prevailed in the east since the sixth general
council. (A. D. 681.) In the west

the Christian era was first invented in the sixth century: it was propagated
in the eighth by the authority

and writings of venerable Rede: but it was not till the tenth, that the use
became legal and popular. See

FArt de verifier les Dates, Dissert. Pretiminaire, p. hi. 13. Dictionnaire
Diplomatique, torn, i. p. 329—337, the

works of a laborious society of Benedictine monks.

