168 THE DECLINE AND FALL

serving from his own experience, that the juster cause had often been
oppressed

by successful violence. Whatever merit may be discovered in the laws of the

Lombards, they are the genuine fruit of the reason of the barbarians, who
never

admitted the bishops of Italy to a seat in their legislative councils. But the
suc­

cession of their kings is marked with virtue and ability; the troubled series
of

their annals is adorned with fair intervals of peace, order and domestic
happi­

ness; and the Italians enjoyed a milder and more equitable government, than

any of the other kingdoms which had been founded on the ruins of the western

empire. (1)

Amidst the arms of the Lombards, and under the despotism of the Greeks, we

again inquire into the fate of Rome, (2) which had reached, about the close of
the

sixth century, the lowest period of her depression. By the removal of the seat
of

empire, and the successive loss of the provinces, the sources of public and
private

opulence were exhausted; the lofty tree, under whose shade the nations of the

earth had reposed, was deprived of its leaves and branches, and the sapless
trunk

was left to wither on the ground. The ministers of command, and the messengers

of victory, no longer met on the Appian or Flaminian way; and the hostile ap­

proach of the Lombards was often felt and continually feared. The inhabitants

of a potent and peaceful capital, who visit without an anxious thought the
garden

of the adjacent country, will faintly picture in their fancy the distress of
the Ro­

mans; they shut or opened their gates with a trembling hand, beheld from the

walls the flames of their houses, and heard the lamentations of their
brethren, who

were coupled together like dogs, and dragged away into distant slavery beyond

the sea and the mountains. Such incessant alarms must annihilate the pleasures

and interrupt the labours of a rural life; and the Campagna of Rome was
speedily

reduced to the state of a dreary wilderness, in which the land is barren, the
wa­

ters are impure, and the air is infectious. Curiosity and ambition no longer
at­

tracted the nations to the capital of the world: but if chance or necessity
directed

the steps of a wandering stranger, he contemplated with horror the vacancy and

solitude of the city, and might be tempted to ask, Where is the senate, and
where

are the people? In a season ef excessive rains, the Tiber swelled above its
banks,

and rushed with irresistible violence into the valleys of the seven hills. A
pesti­

lential disease arose from the stagnation of the deluge, and so rapid was the
conta­

gion, that fourscore persons expired in an hour, in the midst of a solemn
procession,

which implored the mercy of heaven. (3) A society, in which marriage is encou­

raged and industry prevails, soon repairs the accidental losses of pestilence
and.

war; but as the far greater part of the Romans was condemned to hopeless indi­

gence and celibacy, the depopulation was constant and visible, and the gloomy
en­

thusiasts might expect the approaching failure of the human race. (4) Yet the

number of citizens still exceeded the measure of subsistence: their precarious
food

was supplied from the harvests of Sicily or Egypt; and the frequent repetition
of

famine betrays the inattention of the emperor to a distant province. The
edifices

of Rome were exposed to the same ruin and decay; the mouldering fabrics were

easily overthrown by inundations, tempests, and earthquakes, and the monks,
who

had occupied the most advantageous stations, exulted in their base triumph
over

the ruins of antiquity. (5) It is commonly believed, that pope Gregory I.
attacked

the temples and mutilated the statues of the city; that by the command of the
bar­

barian, the Palatine library was reduced to ashes; and that the history of
Livy was

the peculiar mark of his absurd and mischievous fanaticism. The writings of

Gregory himself reveal his implacable aversion to the monuments of classic
genius:

and he points his severest censure against the profane learning of a bishop,
who

taught the art of grammar, studied the Latin poets, and pronounced with the
same

(1) Read (he history of Paul Wamefrid: particularly lib. iii. e. 16. Baroniui
rejects the praise, which ap­

pears to contradict the invectives of pope Gregory the Greek; hut Mnratori
(Annali d'ltalia, torn. v. p. 217.)

presumes to insinuate that the saint may have magnified the faults of Arians
and enemies.

(2) The passages of the homilies of Gregory, which represent the miserable
state of the city and country,

are transcribed in the annals of Baronius, A. D. 590. No. 16. A. D. 595. No.
2, &c. &e.

(3) Theinundation and plague were reported by a deacon, whom his bishop,
Gregory of Tours, had des­

patched to Rome for some relies. The ingenious messenger embellished his tale
and the river with a great

dragon.and a train of little serpents (Greg. Turon. lib. x. c. 1.)

(4) Gregory of Rome (Dialog, lib. ii. c. 15.) relates a memorable prediction
of St. Benedict. Roma a Gen-

tihbus non extenninabitur sed tempegtatibus, coruscis turbinibus ac terrse
motu in semetipsa mareeseet.

Such a prophecy melts into true history, and becomes the evidence of the fact
after it was invented.

(5) Quia in uno se ore cum Jovis laudibus, Christi laudes non capiunt, et
quant grave nefand qmque sit epis-

copis canere tjuod nee laico religion) conveniat, ipse considera (lib. ix. ep.
4.) The writings of GrKrory hini-

Klf attest his lujiocence of any classjc taste or literature.

