OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

with the chief of the enemy, he proposed the option of three honourable condi­

tions: that he should be allowed to return to Medina, or be stationed in a
frontier

garrison against the Turks, or safely conducted to the presence of Yezid. But

the commands of the caliph, or his lieutenant, were stern and absolute; and
Ho-

sein was informed that he must either submit as a captive and a criminal to
the

commander of the faithful, or expect the consequences of his rebellion. " Do

you think," replied he, " to terrify me with death?" And, during the short re-

■spite of a night, he prepared with cairn and solemn resignation to encounter
his

fate. He checked the lamentations of his sister Fatima, who deplored the im­

pending ruin of his house. "Our trust," said Hosein, "is in God alone. All

things both in heaven and earth, must perish and return to their Creator. My

brother, my father, my mother, were better than me; and every Mussulman has

an example in the prophet." He pressed his friends to consult their safety by
a

timely flight; they unanimously refused to desert or survive their beloved
master;

and their courage was fortified by a fervent prayer and the assurance of
paradise.

On the morning of the fatal day, he mounted on horseback, with his sword in
one

hand, and the Koran in the other; his generous band of martyrs consisted only
of

thirty-two horse and forty foot; but their flanks and rear were secured by the

tent-ropes, and by a deep trench which they had filled with lighted fagots,
ac­

cording to the practice of the Arabs. The enemy advanced with reluctance; and

one of their chiefs deserted, with thirty followers, to claim the partnership
of in­

evitable death. In every close onset, or single combat, the despair of the
Fati-

mites was invincible; but the surrounding multitude galled them from a
distance

with a cloud of arrows, and the horses and men were successively slain: a
truce

was allowed on both sides for the hour of prayer; and the battle at length
expired

by the death of the last of the companions of Hosein. Alone, weary, and wound­

ed, he seated himself at the door of his tent. As he tasted a drop of water,
he

was pierced in the mouth with a dart; and his son and nephew, two beautiful

youths, were killed in his arms. He lifted his hands to heaven; they were full

of blood, and he uttered a funeral prayer for the living and the dead. In a
trans­

port of despair, his sister issued from the tent, and adjured the general of
the Cu-

fians, that he would not suffer Hosein to be murdered before his eyes; a tear

trickled down his venerable beard; and the boldest of his soldiers fell back
on

every side as the dying hero threw himself among them. The remorseless Sha-

mer, a name detested by the faithful, reproached their cowardice; and the
grand­

son of Mahomet was slain with three-and-thirty strokes of lances and swords.

After they had trampled on his body, they carried his head to the castle of
Cufa,

and the inhuman Obeidollah struck him on the mouth with a cane. " Alas," ex­

claimed an aged Mussulman, '* on these lips have I seen the lips of the
apostle of

God!" In a distant age and climate, the tragic scene of the death of Hosein
will

awaken the sympathy of the coldest reader. (1) On the annual festival of his

martyrdom, in the devout pilgrimage to his sepulchre, his Persian votaries
aban­

don their souls to the religious frenzy of sorrow and indignation. (2)

When the sisters and children of Ali were brought in chains to the throne of

Damascus, the caliph was advised to extirpate the enmity of a popular and hos­

tile race, whom he had injured beyond the hope of reconciliation. But Yezid

preferred the counsels of mercy; and the mourning family was honourably dis­

missed to mingle their tears with their kindred at Medina. The glory of mar­

tyrdom superseded the right of primogeniture; and the twelve imams,(3) or pon­

tiffs of the Persian creed, are Ali, Hassen, Hosein, and the lineal
descendants of

Hosein to the ninth generation. Without arms, or treasures, or subjects, they

successively enjoyed the veneration of the people, and provoked the jealousy
of

the reigning caliphs; their tombs at Mecca or Medina, on the banks of the Eu­

phrates, or in the province of Chorasan, are still visited by the devotion of
their

sect. Their names were often the pretence of sedition and civil war; but these

royal saints despised the pomp of the world, submitted to the will of God and

the injustice of man, and devoted their innocent lives to the study and
practice of

(t) I baTe abridged the interesting narrative of Ockley (torn. ii. p.
170—231.) It is long and minute: but the

pathetic, almost always, consists in the detail of little circumstances.

(2) Niebuhr the Dane (Voyages en Arable, &c. torn. ii. p, 208, &e.) is perhaps
the only European traveller

who has dared to visit Meshed Ali and Meshed Hosein. The two sepulchres are in
the hands of tbe Turks,

who tolerate and tax the devotion af the Persian heretics. The festival of the
death of Hosein is amply described

by Sir John Chardin, a traveller whom I have often praised.

(3) The general article of /mam, hi d'Herbelot's Bib]iotheque,will indicate
the succession; and the lives of the

twlvc are given under their respective names.

