OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 189

cocks, ostriches, roebucks, and wild boars, and the noble game of lions and
tigers

were sometimes turned loose for the bolder pleasure of the chase. Nine hun­

dred and sixty elephants, were maintained for the use or splendou:- of the
great

king: his tents and baggage were carried into the field by twelve thousand
great

camels, and eight thousand of a smaller size;(l) and the royal stables were
filled

with six thousand mules and horses, among whom the names of Shebdiz and Barid

are renowned for their speed or beauty. Six thousand guards successively
mount­

ed before the palace-gate; the service of the interior apartments was
performed

by twelve thousand slaves, and in the number of three thousand virgins, the
fair­

est of Asia, some happy concubine might console her master for the age or in­

difference of Sira. 1 he various treasures of gold, silver, gems, silk, and
aroma-

tics, were deposited in a hundred subterraneous vaults; and the chamber of
Bada-

■verd denoted the accidental gift of the winds which had wafted the spoils of
Hera-

clius into one of the Syrian harbours of his rival. The voice of flattery, and
perhaps

of fiction, is not ashamed to compute the thirty thousand rich hangings that
adorned

the walls, the forty thousand columns of silver, or more probably of marble,
and

plated wood, that supported the roof; and a thousand globes of gold suspended
in

the dome, to imitate the motions of the planets and the constellations of the
zodi­

ac. (2) While'the Persian monarch contemplated the wonders of his art and

power, he received an epistle from an obscure citizen of Mecca, inviting him
to

acknowledge Mahomet as the apostle of God. He rejected the invitation, and

tore the epistle. It is thus (exclaimed the Arabian prophet) that God will
tear

the kingdom, and reject the sufifilications, of Cliosroes. (3) Placed on the
verge of

the two great empires of the east, Mahomet observed with secret joy the
progress

of their mutual destruction; and in the midst of the Persian triumphs, he ven­

tured to foretel, that before many years should elapse, victory would again
return

to the banners of the Romans. (4)

At the time when this prediction is said to have been delivered, no prophecy

could be more distant from its accomplishment, since the first twelve years of

Heraclius announced the approaching dissolution of the empire. If the motives

of Chosroes had been pure and honourable, he must have ended the quarrel with

the death of Phocas, and he would have embraced, as his best ally, the
fortunate

African who had so generously avenged the injuries of his benefactor Maurice.

The prosecution of the war revealed the true character of the barbarian: and
the

suppliant embassies of Heraclius to beseech his clemency, that he would spare

the innocent, accept a tribute, and give peace to the world, were rejected
with

contemptuous silence or insolent menace. Syria, Egypt, and the provinces of

Asia, were subdued by the Persian arms, while Europe, from the confines of Is-

tria to the long wall of Thrace, was oppressed by the Avars, unsatiated with
the

blood and rapine of the Italian war. They had coolly massacred their male cap­

tives in the sacred field of Pannonia; the women and children were reduced to

servitude, and the noblest virgins were abandoned to the promiscuous lust of
the

barbarians. The amorous matron who opened the gates of Firuli passed a short

night in the arms of her royal lover: the next evening Romilda was condemned
to

the embraces of twelve Avars, and the third day the Lombard princess was im­

paled in the sight of the camp, while the chagan observed, with a cruel smile,

that such a husband was the fit recompense of her lewdness and perfidy. (5) By

these implacable enemies, Heraclius, on either side, was insulted and
besieged:

and the Roman empire was reduced to the walls of Constantinople, with the rem­

nant of Greece, Italy, and Africa, and some maritime cities, from Tyre to
Trebi-

. (1) The difference between the two races consists in one or two humps; the
dromedary has only one; the

size of the proper camel is larger; the country he comes from, Turkestan or
Bactriana; the dromedary is

confined to Arabia aod Africa. Buffon, Hist. Naturelle, torn. li. p. 211, &c.
Aristot. Hist. Animal, torn. i. lib.

u.c. 1.: tom.ii. p. 185.

(2) Theophanes, Chronograph, p. 268. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale. p.
997. The Greeks describe

the decay, the Persians the splendour of Dastagerd; but the former speak from
the modest witness of the eye,

the latter from the vague report of the ear.

(3) The historians of Mahomet, Abnlfeda, (in Vit. Mahommed, p. 92,93.) and
Gagnier, (Vie de Mahomet,

J°m., ii. p. 247.) date this embassy in the seventh year of the Hegira, which
commences A. D. 628. May 11.

Their Chronology is erroneous, since Chosroes died in the month of February of
the same year. (Pagi, Cri-

tica, torn. ii. p. 779.) The count de Boulainvilliers (Vie de Mahommed, p.
327,328.) places this embassy about

A.]). 615, soon after the conquest of Palestine. Yet Mahomet would scarcely
have ventured so soon on so

bold a step.

C4) See the thirtieth chapter of the Koran, entitled the Greeks. Our honest
and learned translator Sale,.

CP.. 330,331.) fairly states this conjecture, guess, wager, of Mahomet; but
Boulainvilliers, p. 329—344,) with

wicked intentions, labours to establish this evident prophecy of a future
event, which must, in his opinion,

embarrass the Christian polemics.

Paul Wameftid, de Gestis Langobardoruro, lib. ir. c, 38*-42. Muratori, Annali
d'lralia, torn, v. n. 305, gee.

