136 THE DECLINE AND FALL

almost one thousand years, from the twelve tables to the reign of Justinian,
may

be divided into three periods almost equal in duration, and distinguished from
each

other by the mode of instruction and the character of civilians, (1) Pride and
ig­

norance contributed, during the first period, to confine within narrow limits
the

science of the Roman law. On the public days of market or assembly, the
masters

of the art were seen walking in the forum, ready to impart the needful advice
to

the meanest of their fellow citizens, from whose votes, on a future occasion,
they

might solicit a grateful return. As their years and honours increased, they
seat­

ed themselves at home on a chair or throne, to expect with patient gravity the

visits of their clients, who, at the dawn of day, from the town and country,
began

to thunder at their door. The duties of social life, and the incidents of
judicial

proceeding, were the ordinary subject of these consultations, and the verbal
or

written opinion of the jurisconsults was framed according to the rules of
prudence

and law. The youths of their own order and family were permitted to listen;

their children enjoyed the benefit of more private lessons, and the Mucian
race

was long renowned for the hereditary knowledge of the civil law. The second

Seriod, the learned and splendid age of jurisprudence, may be extended from
the

irth of Cicero to the reign of Severus Alexander. A system was formed, schools

were instituted, books were composed, and both the living and the dead became

subservient to the instruction of the student. The tripartite of JElius Pstus,
sur-

named Catus, or the Cunning, was preserved as the oldest work of
jurisprudence.

Cato the censor derived some additional fame from his legal studies, and those
of

his son: the kindred appellation of Mucius Scscvola was illustrated by three
sages

of the law; but the perfection of the science was ascribed to Servius
Sulpicius,

their disciple and the friend of Tully; and the long succession, which shone
with

equal lustre under the republic and under the Ciesars, is finally closed by
the re­

spectable characters of Papinian, of Paul, and of Ulpian. Their names, and the

various titles of their productions, have been minutely preserved, and the
exam­

ple of Labeo may suggest some idea of their diligence and fecundity. That emi­

nent lawyer of the Augustan age divided the year between the city and country,

between business and composition; and four hundred books are enumerated as the

fruit of his retirement. Of the collections of his rival Capito, the two
hundred

and fifty-ninth book is expressly quoted; and few teachers could deliver their

opinions in less than a century of volumes. In the third period, between the

reigns of Alexander and Justinian, the oracles of jurisprudence were almost
mute.

The measure of curiosity had been filled; the throne was occupied by tyrants

and barbarians; the active spirits were diverted by religious disputes, and
the pro­

fessors of Rome, Constantinople, and Berytus, were humbly content to repeat
the

lessons of their more enlightened predecessors. From the slow advances and

rapid decay of these legal studies, it may be inferred, that they require a
state of

peace and refinement. From the multitude of voluminous civilians who fill the

intermediate space, it is evident, that such studies may be pursued, and such

works mav be performed, with a common share of judgment, experience, and in­

dustry. The genius of Cicero and Virgil was more sensibly felt, as each
revolving

age had been found incapable of producing a similar or a second: but the most

eminent teachers of the law were assured of leaving disciples equal or
superior to

themselves in merit and reputation.

The jurisprudence which had been grossly adapted to the wants of the first Ro­

mans, was polished and improved in the seventh century of the city, by the
alliance

of Grecian philosophy. The Scxvolas had been taught by use and experience; but

Servius Sulpicius was the first civilian who established his art on a certain
and ge­

neral theory. (2) For the discernment of truth and falsehood, he applied, as
an

(1) The series of the civil lawyers it deduced by Pomponius fde Origine Juris
Pandect, lib. i. tin ii.) The

moderns hare discussed, with learning and criricism, this branch of liiernry
history; and among these I have

chiefly been raided by Gravina (p. 41—79.,) and Heineccius (Hist. J. R. No.
113—351.) Cicero, more especially

in his books de Oratoie, de Claris Oratorihos, de Legibus, and the Clavis
Ciceroniana of Ernesti (under the

names of Mucius, &e.,) afford much genuine and pleasing information. Horace
often alludes to the morning

labours of civilians (Serm. 1.1.10. Epist. 2. 4.103, fee.

Agrtcolam laudat juris legumque peritus a

Sub galli cantum, consultor ubi ostia pulsat.

Rome dulce diu fuit et solemne, reclusa

Mane domo vigilare, clienti promere jura.

(2) Craisut, or rather Cicero himself, proposes (de Oratore, 1.41,42.) an idea
of the art or science of juris-

prudence, which the eloquent, but illiterate, Antonius(l. 58.) affects to
deride. It was partly executed by

