OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 387 -

vast enterprise, perhaps of easy execution, must have seemed extravagant to
vul­

gar minds; and the visionary conqueror was soon reminded of his dependance and

servitude. The friends of Farik had effectually stated his services and
wrongs: at

the court of Damascus, the proceedings of Musa were blamed, his intentions
were

suspected, and his delay in complying with the first invitation was chastised
by a

harsher and more peremptory summons. An intrepid messenger of the caliph

entered his camp at Lugo in Gallicia, and in the presence of the Saracens and

Christians arrested the bridle of his horse. His own loyalty, or that of his
troops,

inculcated the duty of obedience; and his disgrace was alleviated by the
recall of

his rival, and the permission of investing with his two governments his two
sons,

Abdallah and Abdelaziz. His long triumph, from Ceuta to Damascus, displayed

the spoils of Africa and the treasures of Spain: four hundred Gothic nobles,
with

gold coronets and girdles, were distinguished in his train; and the number of
male

and female captives, selected for their birth or beauty, was computed at
eighteen,

or even at thirty, thousand persons. As soon as he reached Tiberias in
Palestine,

he was apprized of the sickness and danger of the caliph, by a private message

from Soliman, his brother and presumptive heir; who wished to reserve for his

own reign the spectacle of victory. Had Walid recovered, the delay of Musa

would have been criminal: he pursued his march, and found an enemy on the

throne. In his trial before a partial judge, against a popular antagonist, he
was

convicted of vanity and falsehood; and a fine of two hundred thousand pieces
of

gold either exhausted his poverty or proved his rapaciousness. The unworthy

treatment of Tarik was revenged by a similar indignity, and the veteran com­

mander, after a public whipping, stood a whole day in the sun before the
palace

gate, till he obtained a decent exile, under the pious name of a pilgrimage to
Mec­

ca. The resentment of the caliph might have been satiated with the ruin of

Musa, but his fears demanded the extirpation of a potent and injured family. A

sentence of death was intimated with secrecy and speed to the trusty servants
of

the throne both in Africa and Spain: and the forms, if not the substance, of
jus­

tice was superseded in this bloody execution. In the mosch or palace of
Cordova,

Abdelaziz was slain by the swords of the conspirators; they accused their go­

vernor of claiming the honours of royalty: and his scandalous marriage with
Egi-

lona, the widow of Roderic, offended the prejudices both of the Christians and

Moslems. By a refinement of cruelty, the head of the son was presented to the

father, with an insulting question, whether he acknowledged the features of
the

rebel ? " I know his features," he exclaimed with indignation: " I assert his
inno­

cence; and I imprecate the same, a juster, fate against the authors of his
death."

The age and despair of Musa raised him above the power of kings; and he ex­

pired at Mecca of the anguish of a broken heart. His rival was more favourably

treated: his services were forgiven; and Tarik was permitted to mingle with
the

crowd of slaves. (1) I am ignorant whether count Julian was rewarded with the

death which he deserved indeed, though not from the hands of the Saracens; but

the tale of their ingratitude to the sons of Witiza is disproved by the most
unques­

tionable evidence. The two royal youths were reinstated in the private patri­

mony of their father; but on the decease of Elba the elder, his daughter was
un­

justly despoiled of her portion by the violence of her uncle Sigebut. The
Gothic

maid pleaded her cause before the caliph Hasheim, and obtained the restitution

of her inheritance; but she was given in marriage to a noble Arabian; and
their

two sons, Isaac and Ibrahim, were received in Spain with the consideration
that

was due to their origin and riches.

A province was assimilated to the victorious state by the introduction of
stran­

gers and the imitative spirit of the natives; and Spain, which had been
succes­

sively tinctured with Punic, and Roman, and Gothic, blood, imbibed, in a few
ge­

nerations, the name and manners of the Arabs. The first conquerors, and the

twenty successive lieutenants of the caliphs, were attended by a numerous
train

of civil and military followers, who preferred a distant fortune to a narrow
home:

the private and public interest was promoted by the establishment of faithful
colo­

nies; and the cities of Spain were proud to commemorate the tribe or country
of

and to return home by the north: and all three are perhaps surpassed by the
real and successful enterprise of

Hannibal.

(1) I much rejrretour lost, or my iarnorance, of two Arabic works of the
seventh century, a life of Musa, and

a poem on the exploits of Tarik. Of these authentic pieces, the former was
composed by a grandson of Musa,

who had escaped from the massacre of his kindred; the latter by the vizier of
the first Abdalrahman, caliph of

Spain, who might have conversed with tome of the veterans of the conqueror.
(Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana,

. tom.it. p. M. 139.)

