OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

the evidence of the Latins; and the lives(l) and epistles of the popes them­

selves.

Two original epistles from Gregory II. to the emperor Leo, are still
extant;(2)

and if they cannot be praised as the most perfect models of eloquence and
logic,

they exhibit the portrait, or at least the mask, of the founder of the papal
mo­

narchy. " During ten pure and fortunate years (says Gregory to the emperor,)

we have tasted the annual comforts of your royal letters, subscribed in purple
ink,

with your own hand the sacred pledges of your attachment to the orthodox creed
of

our fathers. How deplorable is the change! how tremendous the scandal! You

now accuse the catholics of idolatry: and, by the accusation, you betray your
own

impiety and ignorance. To this ignorance we are compelled to adapt the gross-

ness of our style and arguments: the first elements of holy letters are
sufficient for

yourconfusion; and were you to enter a grammar school, and avow yourself the
ene­

my of our worship, the simple and pious children would be provoked to cast
their

horn-books at your head. After this decent salutation, the pope attempts the

usual distinctions between the idols of antiquity and the Christian images.
The

former were the fanciful representations of phantoms or demons, at a time when

the true God had not manifested his person in any visible likeness. The latter

are the genuine forms of Christ, his mother, and his saints, who had approved,
by

a crowd of miracles, the innocence and merit of this relative worship. He must

indeed have trusted to the ignorance of Leo, since he could assert the
perpetual

use of images, from the apostolic age, and their venerable presence in the six
sy­

nods of the catholic church. A more specious argument is drawn from the pre­

sent possession and recent practice: the harmony of the Christian world
supersedes

the demand of a general council; and Gregory frankly confesses, that such
assem­

blies can only bp useful under the reign of an orthodox prince. To the
impudent

and inhuman Leo, more guilty than a heretic, he recommends peace, silence, and

implicit obedience to his spiritual guides of Constantinople and Rome. The li­

mits of civil and ecclesiastical powers are defined by the pontiff'. To the
former

he appropriates the body; to the latter the soul: the sword of justice is in
the hands

of the magistrate; the more formidable weapon of excommunication is intrusted

to the clergy; and in the exercise of their divine commission, a zealous son
will

not spare his offending father: the successor of St. Peter may lawfully
chastise the

kings of the earth. *' You assault us, O tyrant! with a carnal and military
hand:

unarmed and naked, we can only implore the Christ, the prince of the heavenly

host, that he will send unto you a devil, for the destruction of your body and
the

salvation of your soul. You declare, with foolish arrogance, I will despatch
my

orders to Rome; I will break in pieces the image of St. Peter; and Gregory,
like

his predecessor Martin, shall be transported in chains and in exile, to the
foot of the

imperial throne. Would to God, that I might be permitted to tread in the foot­

steps of the holy Martin; but may the fate of Constans serve as a warning to
the

persecutors of the church. After his just condemnation by the bishops of
Sicily,

the tyrant was cut off, in the fulness of his sins, by a domestic servant; the
saint is

still adored by the nations of Scythia, among whom he ended his banishment and

his life. But it is our duty to live for the edification and support of the
faithful peo­

ple; nor are we reduced to risk our safety on the event of a combat. Incapable
as

you are of defending your Roman subjects, the maritime situation of the city
may

perhaps expose it to your depredation; but we can remove to the distance of
four-

and-twenty stadia(3) to the first fortress-of the Lombards, and then you may

pursue the winds. Are you ignorant, that the popes are the bond of union; the

mediators of peace between the east and west ? The eyes of the nations are
fixed

f 1) With some minute difference, the molt learned critici, Lucas Holstenius,
Sehelestrate, Cinmphini, Bian-

cmni, Muratori (Prolegomena ad torn. iii. pars. l.J are agreed that the Liber
Pontificalis was composed and

continoed by the apostolical librarians and notaries of the eighth and ninth
centuries; and that the last, and

smallest part is the work of Anastasius, whose name it bears. The style is
barbarous, the narrative partial,

the details are trifling—yet it must be read as a curious and authentic record
of the times. The epistles of the

popes are dispersed in the volumes of Councils.

(2) The two epistles of Gregory II. have been preserved in the Acts of the
Nieene Council, (torn. viii. p. 651

—674.) They are without a date, which is variously fixed by Baronius in the
year 726. by Muratori (Annali

d'ltalia, torn. vi.p. 120.) in 729,and by Pagiin730. Such is the force of
prejudice, that some papists have

praised the good sense and moderation of these letters.

(3) E'xoa-t-TEO-crsep* rraSi» ujrexwpijtrs* 0 Ap%*ip°.vs Partis n;, rtfv JfOW
TM5 KapsmMNf mi v-rxyt 8i»fov tou?

avsaov;. (Epist. i. p. 864.) This proximity of the Lombards, is hard of
digestion. Camillo Pellegrini (Dis-

aert. iv. de Ducatu Beneventi,in the Script. Ital. torn. v. p. 172,173 )
forcibly reckons the twenty-fourth sta­

dia, not from Rome, but from the limits of the Roman duchy, to the first
fortress, perhaps Sora, of the Lom­

bards. I rather believe that Gregory, with the pedantry of the ago, employs
tttiditi for miles, without much

inquiry into the genuine measure.

