124 THE DECLINE AND FALL

sometimes granted a personal exemption from the obligation and penalty of
parti-

ticular statutes; and each indulgence was an act of jurisdiction exercised by
the re­

public over the first of her citizens. His humble privilege was at length
transformed

into the prerogative of a tyrant; and the Latin expression of released from
the

lait>8,(\) was supposed to exalt the emperor above all human restraints, and
to

leave his conscience and reason as the sacred measure of his conduct. 2. A
simi­

lar dependence was implied in the decrees of the senate, which, in every
reign,

defined the titles and powers of an elective magistrate. But it was not before
the

ideas, and even the language, of the Romans had been corrupted, that a royal

law,(2) and an irrevocable gift of the people, were created by the fancy of
Ulpian,

or more probably of Tribonian himself :(3) and the origin of imperial power,
though

false in fact, and slavish in its consequence, was supported on a principle of
free­

dom and justice. *' The pleasure of the emperor has the vigour and effect of
law,

since the Roman people, by the roy:il law, have transferred to their prince
the full

extent of their own power and sovereignly."(4) The will of a single man, of a

child perhaps, was allowed to prevail over the wisdom of ages and the
inclinations

of millions; and the degenerate Greeks were proud to declare, that in his
.hands

alone the arbitrary exercise of legislation could be safely deposited. " What
inte­

rest or passion," exclaims Theophilus in the court of Justinian, "can reach
the

calm and sublime elevation of the monarch? He is already master of the lives
and

fortunes of his subjects; and those who have incurred his displeasure, are
already

numbered with the dead. "(5) Disdaining the language of flattery, the
historian

may confess, that in questions of private jurisprudence, the absolute
sovereign of

a great empire can seldom be influenced by any personal considerations.
Virtue,

or even reason, will suggest to his impartial mind, that he is the guardian of
peace

and equity, and that the interest of society is inseparably connected with his
own.

Under the weakest and most vicious reign, the seat of justice was filled by
the wis­

dom and integrity of Papinian and Ulpian;(6) and the purest materials of the
Code

and Pandects are inscribed with the names of Caracalla and his ministers. (7)
The

tyrant of Rome was sometimes the benefactor of the provinces. A dagger termi­

nated the crimes of Domitian; but the prudence of Nerva confirmed his acts,

which, in the joy of their deliverance, had been rescinded by an indignant
senate. (8)

Vet in the rescri/ils,(9) replies to the consultations of the magistrates, the
wisest

of princes might be deceived by a partial exposition of the case. And this
abuse,

which placed their hasty decisions on the same level with mature and
deliberate

acts of legislation, was ineffectually condemned by the sense and example of
Tra­

jan. The rescripts of the emperor, his grants and decrees, his edicts and
firagma-

tic sanctions, were subscribed in purple ink,(10) and transmitted to the
provinces

as general or special laws, which the magistrates were bound to execute, and
the

people to obey. But as their number continually multiplied, the rule of
obedience

became each day more doubtful and obscure, till the will of the sovereign was
fixed

and ascertained in the Gregorian, the Hermogenian, and the Theodosian codes.

The two first, of which some fragments have escaped, were framed by two
private

(1) The constitutional style of I.rgibiu Solutus ii misinterpreted by the art
or ignorance of Dion Cnssitn

(torn. i. lib. liii. p. 713.) On this occasion, bis editor, Reimar, joins the
universal censure which freedom and

criticism have pronounced against that slavish historian.

(2) The woni (lex regia) was still more recent than the thing. The slaves of
Commodus or Caracalla would

have started at the name of royalty.

(3) See Gravina (Opp. p. 601—512.,) and Beaufort (Repoblique Rnmaine, torn. i.
p. S55—274.) He has made

« proper use of two dissertations by John Frederick Gronovius and NToodt,both
translated, with valuable notes,

by Barbeyrac, 2 vols, in 12mo. 1731.

(4) Institnt. lib. i. tit. ii No, 6. Pandect, lib. i. tit. iv. leg. i. Cod.
Justinian, lib. i. tit. xvii. leg. i. No. 7. In

his antiquities and elements. Heineccins has amply treated de
constitutionibuspriiicipum, which are illustrated

by Gndefroy (Comment, ad Cod. Theodos. lib. i. tit. 1—3.,) and Gravina (p.
87—00.)

(5) Theophilus, rn Paiaphra*. Gi-sse. Institnt. p. 33,34. edit. Reitz. For his
person, time, and writings, see

the Theophilus of J. H. Mylins, F.xcurs. iii. p. 1034—1703. .

(6) There is more envy than reason in the complaint of Mncrinus (Jul.
Capitolin. c. xiii..)—Nefai esse leges

videri Commodl et Cai-acalla et hnminum impcritnrum vultimntes. Commodus was
made a Divus by Several

(Dodwell, Pneleci. viii. p. 324,325.) Yet he occurs only twice in the
Pandects.

(7) Of Amonius Caracalla alone two hundred constitutions ate extant in the
Code, and with his father one

hundred and sixty. These two princes are quoted fifty times in the Pandects
and eight in the Institutes (Te-

rasson, p. 205.)

(8) Plin. Secund. Epistol. x. 66. Sueton. in Domitian. e. xxiii.

(9) It was a maxim of Constamine, contra jus rescriptanon valeant (Cod.
Theodos. lib. i. tit. ii. lepr. i.) The

emperors reluctantly allow some scrutiny into the law and the tact, some
delay, petition. Sec: but these insuf­

ficient remedies are too much in the discretion and at the peril of the judge.

(10) A componnd of vermilion and cinnabar, which marks the imperial diplomas
from Leo I, (A. D. 470.) to

the fall of the Greek empire (Bibliotheque Raisonnee de la Diplomatique, torn.
i. p. 509—514. Lami,de Eru-

•dMane Apostolorum, torn, ii. p. 720—726.)

