OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 235

Latins with the names of Arians and Nestorians, and imputed the adoration of

four gods to those who separated the two natures of Christ. Fremona, a place
of

worship, or rather of exile, was assigned to the Jesuit missionaries. Their
skill

in the liberal and mechanic arts, their theological learning, and the decency
of

their manners inspired a barren esteem; but they were not endowed with the
gift

of miracles,(l) and they vainly solicited a re-enforcement of European troops.

The patience and dexterity of forty years at length obtained a more favourable

audience, and two emperors of Abyssinia were persuaded that Rome could en­

sure the temporal and everlasting happiness of her votaries. The first of
these

royal converts lost his crown and his life; and the rebel army was sanctified
by the

abuna, who hurled an anathema at the apostate, and absolved his subjects from

their oath of fidelity. The fate of Zadenghel was revenged by the courage and

fortune of Susneus, who ascended the throne under the name of Segued, and more

vigorously prosecuted the pious enterprise of his kinsman. After the amusement

of some unequal combats between the Jesuits and his illiterate priests, the
em­

peror declared himself a proselyte to the synod of Chalcedon, presuming that
his

clergy and people would embrace without delay the religion of their prince.
The

liberty of choice was succeeded by a law, which imposed, under pain of death,
the

belief of the two natures of Christ: the Abyssinians were enjoined to work and
to

play on the Sabbath; and Segued, in the face of Europe and Africa, renounced
his

connexion with the Alexandrian church. A Jesuit, Alphonso Mendez, the ca­

tholic patriarch of Ethiopia, accepted in the name of Urban VIII. the homage

and abjuration of his penitent. "I confess," said the emperor on his knees, "
I

confess that the pope is the vicar of Christ, the successor of St. Peter, and
the so­

vereign of the world. To him I swear true obedience; and at his feet I offer
my

person and kingdom." A similar oath was repeated by his son, his brother, the

■Clergy, the nobles, and even the ladies of the court: the Latin patriarch was
in­

vested with honours and wealth; and his missionaries erected their churches or
ci­

tadels in the most convenient stations of the empire. The Jesuits themselves
de­

clare the fatal indiscretion of their chief, who forgot the mildness of the
gospel

and the policy of his order, to introduce with hasty violence the liturgy of
Rome

and the inquisition of Portugal. He condemned the ancient practice of
circumci­

sion, which health rather than superstition had first inventedin the climate
of Ethi­

opia. (2) A new baptism, a new ordination, was inflicted on the natives; and
they

trembled with horror when the most holy of the dead were torn from their
graves,

when the most illustrious of the living were excommunicated by a foreign
priest.

In the defence of their religion and liberty, the Abyssinians rose in arms,
with

desperate but unsuccessful zeal. Five rebellions were extinguished in the
blood

of the insurgents: two abunas were slain in battle, whole legions were
slaughtered

in the field, or suffocated in their caverns; and neither merit, nor rank, nor
sex,

could save from an ignominious death the enemies of Rome. But the victorious

monarch was finally subdued by the constancy of the nation, of his mother, of
his

son, and of his most faithful friends. Segued listened to the voice of pity,
of rea­

son, perhaps of fear; and his edict of liberty of conscience instantly
revealed the

tyranny and weakness of the Jesuits. On the death of his father, Basilides ex­

pelled the Latin patriarch, and restored to the wishes of the nation the faith
and

the discipline of Egypt. The Monophysite churches resounded with a song of

triumph, " that the sheep of Ethiopia were now delivered from the hyienas of
the

west;" and the gates of that solitary realm were for ever shut against the
arts, the

science, and the fanaticism of Europe.(3)

(1) Religio Rdmana .... nec precihus patmm nee miraculis ab ipsis editis
sufTulciebatur, is the uncontra­

dicted assuranceof thedevout emperor Susneus to his patriarch Mendez;
(Ludolph. Comment. No. 126. p. 529.)

and such assurances should be preciously kept, as an antidote against any
marvellous legends.

(2) Iain aware how tender is the question of circumcision. Yet I will affirm,
l. That the Ethiopians have

a physical reason for the circumcision of males, and even of females
(Recherches Phitosophiques sur lei Ame-

ricains, torn, ii.) 2. That it was practised in Ethiopia lone; before the
introduction of Judaism or Christianity,

(Horodot. lib. ii. c. 104. Marsham, Canon, Chron. p. 72,73.) " Infantes
cirenmcidunt ob conoictudinem non

ob Judaismnm," says Gregory the Abyssinian priest (apud Fabric Lux Christiana,
p. 720.) Yet, in the heat

of dispute, the Portuguese were sometimes branded with the name of
uncircumcised (La Croze, p. 80. Lu-

dolpli. Hist. Comment, lib. iii. e. 1.)

(3) The three Protestant historians, Lndolphus (Hist. Ethiopia, Francofurt,
1681; Commentarius, 1691; Re-

latio Nova, Sec. 1693 in folio;) Geddes (Church History of Ethiopia, London,
1696. in octavo,) and La Croze,

(Hist, do Christianisme d'&thiopie et d'Armenie. La Hayv, 1739, in duodecimo,)
have drawn their principal

materials from the Jesuits; especially from the General History of Tellez,
published in Portuguese at Conim-

bra, 1660. We might be surprised at their frankness; but their most flagitious
vice, the spirit of persecu­

tion, was, in their eyes, the most meritorious virtue. Ludolphua possessed
some, though a slight advantage!

■from the Ethiopia language, and the personal conversation of Gregory, a free-
spirited Abyssinian priest^

whom he invited from Rome to the court of Saxe-Gotha. See the Theologia
£tliionica of (iregary, in Fa-

briciui, Eyangclii, p. 719—734.

