OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 411

formerly resisted the powers of Athens and Carthage. They stood above twenty

days against the battering-rams and catafiulte, the mines and tortoises of the
be­

siegers; and the place might have been relieved if the mariners of the
imperial

fleet had not been detained at Constantinople in building a church to the
Virgin

Mary. The deacon Theodosius, with the bishop and clergy, was dragged in chains

from the altar to Palermo, cast into a subterraneous dungeon, and exposed to
the

hourly peril of death or apostacy. His pathetic, and not inelegant complaint,
may

be read: as the epitaph of his country.(l) From the Roman conquest to this
final

calamity, Syracuse, now dwindled to the primitive isle of Ortygea, had
insensibly

declined. Yet the relics were still precious; the plate of the cathedral
weighed

five thousand pounds ofrsilver; the entire spoil, was computed at one million
of

pieces of gold (about four hundred thousand pounds sterling,) and the captives

must outnumber the seventeen thousand Christians who were transported from

the sack of Tauromenium into African servitude. In Sicily the religion and
lan­

guage of the Greeks were eradicated; and such was the docility of the rising
gene­

ration, that fifteen thousand boys were circumcised and clothed on the same
day

with the son of the Fatimite caliph. The Arabian squadrons issued from the
har­

bours of Palermo, Biserta, and Tunis; a hundred and fifty towns of Calabria
and

Campania were attacked and pillaged; nor could the suburbs of Rome be defended

by the name of the Cscsars and apostles. Had the Mahometans been united, Italy

must have fallen an easy and glorious accession to the empire of the prophet.
But

the caliphs of Bagdad had lost their authority in the west; the Aglabites and
Fati-

mites usurped the provinces of Africa; their emirs of Sicily aspired to
indepen­

dence; and the design of conquest and dominion was degraded to a repetition of

predatory inroads. (2)

In the sufferings of prostrate Italy, the name of Rome awakens a solemn and

mournful recollection. A fleet of Saracens from the African coast presumed to

enter the mouth of the Tiber, and to approach a city which even yet, in her
fallen

state, was revered as the metropolis of the Christian world. The gates and
ram­

parts were guarded by a trembling people; but the tombs and temples of St.
Peter

and St. Paul were left exposed in the suburbs of the Vatican and of the Ostian

way. Their invisible sanctity had protected them against the Goths, the
Vandals,

and the Lombards; but the Arabs disdained both the gospel and the legend; and

their rapacious spirit was approved and animated by the precepts of the Koran.

The Christian idols were stripped of their costly offerings; a silver altar
was torn

away from the shrine of St. Peter; and if the bodies or the buildings were
left en­

tire, their deliverance must be imputed to the haste, rather than the
scruples, of

the Saracens. In their course along the Appian way, they pillaged Fundi and
be­

sieged Gayeta; but they had turned aside from the walls of Rome, and, by their

divisions, the capitol was saved from the yoke of the prophet of Mecca. The
same

danger still impended on the heads of the Roman people; and their domestic
force

was unequal to the assault of an African emir. They claimed the protection of

their Latin sovereign; but the Carlovingian standard was overthrown by a
detach­

ment of the barbarians: they meditated the restoration of the Greek emperors;

but the attempt was treasonable, and the succour remote and precarious.(3)
Their

distress appeared to receive some aggravation from the death of their
spiritual

and temporal chief; but the pressing emergency superseded the forms and
intrigues

of an election; and the unanimous choice of pope Leo the Fourth(4) was the
safety

of the church and city. This pontiff was born a Roman; the courage of the
first

ages of the republic glowed in his breast; and, amidst the ruins of his
country, he

stood erect, like one of the firm and loftv columns that rear their heads
above the

fragments of the Roman forum. The first days of his reign were consecrated to

the purification and removal of relics, to prayers and processions, and to all
the

(1) The tlarrative or lamentation of Theodosius ii transcribed and illustrated
by Pagi. (Gritica, torn* 3. p.

719, &c.) Constantine Porphyrogenitus (in Vit. Basil, e. 69,70. p. 100—192.)
mentions the loss of Syracuse

and the triumph of the. demons.

(a) The extracts from the Arabie histories of Sicily are given in
AbuIfeda,(Annal. Moslem, p. 271—2730 and

in the first volume of Muratori's Scriptores Rerum Iralicarura. M. de Guignes
(Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p. 363,

664.) lias added some important facts.

(3) One of the most eminent Romans (Gratianus, magister militnm et Romani
palatii sitperista) svas accused

of declaring, Quia Franci nihil novis honi faciunt, neque adjutorium pra;bent,
sed mngis tpite nostra sunt rio-

lenter tollunt. Quare non adveeamus Onecos.et cum eil foidHs pacis
component.es, Francorum vcge met gen-

t*m denostro regno et tlominatione cxpellimus? Anastasius in Leone IV. p. 199.

(4) Voltaire (Hist. Generate, torn. 2, c. 33. p. 124.J appears to be
remarkably struck with the character of

f.eo IV. I have borrowed his feirernl expression, but the sight of the forum
has furnished me Willi t

dwlfhct aiftl TiVPly itntrge.

