THE DECLINE AND FALL

hird is taken, admonished his mistress to hasten her return. In the presence
of

Caled, and of death, the unfortunate Jonas professed his belief in one God,
and his

apostle Mahomet; and continued, till the season of his martyrdom, to discharge

the duties of a brave and sincere Mussulman. When the city was taken, he flew

to the monastery where Eudocia had taken refuge; but the lover was forgotten;

the apostate was scorned; she preferred her religion to her country; and the
jus­

tice of Caled, though deaf to mercy, refused to detain by force a male or
female

inhabitant of Damascus. Four days was the general confined to the city by the

obligation of the treaty, and the urgent cares of his new conquest. His
appetite

for blood and rapine would have been extinguished by the hopeless computation

of time and distance; but he listened to the importunities of Jonas, who
assured

him that the weary fugitives might yet be overtaken. At the head of four thou­

sand horse, in the disguise of Christian Arabs, Caled undertook the pursuit.

They halted only for the moments of prayer; and the guide had a perfect know­

ledge of the country. For a long way the footsteps of the Damascenes were
plain

and conspicuous: they vanished on a sudden; but the Saracens were comforted by

the assurance that the caravan had turned aside into the mountains, and must

speedily fall into their hands. In traversing the ridges of the Libanus, they
en­

dured intolerable hardships, and the sinking spirits of the veteran fanatics
were

supported and cheered by the unconquerable ardour of a lover. From a peasant,

of the country, they were informed that the emperor had sent orders to the
colony

of exiles, to pursue without delay the road of the sea-coast, and of
Constantinople;

apprehensive, perhaps, that the soldiers and people of Antioch might be
discou­

raged by the sight and the story of their sufferings. The Saracens were
conducted

through the territories of Gabala(l) and Laodicea, at a cautious distance from
the

walls of the cities; the rain was incessant, the night was dark, a single
mountain

separated them from the Roman army; and Caled, ever anxious for the safety of

his brethren, whispered an ominous dream in the ear of his companion. With the

dawn of day, the prospect again cleared, and they saw before them, in a
pleasant

valley, the tents of Damascus. After a short interval of repose and prayer,
Caled

divided his cavalry into four squadrons, committing the first to his faithful
Derar,

and reserving the last for himself. They successively rushed on the
promiscuous

multitude, insufficiently provided with arms, and already vanquished by sorrow

and fatigue. Except a captive who was pardoned and dismissed, the Arabs en­

joyed the satisfaction of believing that not a Christian of either sex escaped
the

edge of their scimitars. The gold and silver of Damascus was scattered fiver
the

camp, and a royal wardrobe of three hundred load of silk might clothe an army

of naked barbarians. In the tumult of the battle, Jonas sought and found the
object

of his pursuit; but her resentment was inflamed by the last act of his
perfidy; and

as Eudocia struggled in his hateful embraces, she struck a dagger to her
heart. .

Another female, the widow of Thomas, and the real or supposed daughter of He-

raclius, was spared and released without a ransom; but the generosity of Caled

was the effect of his contempt; and the haughty Saracen insulted, by a message
of

defiance, the throne of the Csesars. Caled had penetrated above a hundred and

fifty miles into the heart of the Roman province: he returned to Damascus with

the same secrecy and speed. On the accession of Omar, the sword of God was

removed from the command; but the caliph, who blamed the rashness) was com­

pelled to applaud the vigour and conduct, of the enterprise.

Another expedition of the conquerors of Damascus will equally display their

avidity and their contempt for the riches of the present world. They were
inform­

ed that the produce and manufactures of the country were annually collected in

the fair of Abyla,(2) about thirty miles from the city; that the cell of a
devout her­

mit was visited at the same time by a multitude of pilgrims; and that the
festival of

trade and superstition would be ennobled by the nuptials of the daughter of
the go­

vernor of Tripoli. Abdallah, the son of Jaafar, a glorious and holy martyr,
un­

dertook, with a banner of five hundred horse, the pious and profitable
commission

of despoiling the infidels. As he approached the fair of Abyla, he was
astonished

(1) The towns of Gabala and Laodicea, which the Arabs passed, still exist in a
state of decay. (Maundrell, p.

11,12. Pocock, vol. ii. p. 13.) Had not the Christians been overtaken, they
must have crossed the Orontes on

some bridge in the sixteen miles between Antioch and the sea, and might have
rejoined the high road of Con­

stantinople at Alexandria. The itineraries wilt represent the directions and
distances, (p. 146.148. 531, 582,

edit. Wesselinir.)

(2) Dair Abil Kudos. After retrenching the last word, the epithet, holy, I
discovered the Abiln of Lysania*

between Damascus and Heliopolis: the name (Abil signifies a vineyard) concurs
with the situation to "justify

rny conjecture. (Reland. Paleslin. torn. i. p. 517. torn. ii. p. 525. 527.)

