OF THE ROMAN EMPIBE. tt*

milay temper was diffused among the subjects of the caliph. Their stern enthu­

siasm was softened by time and prosperity: they sought riches in the
occupations of

industry, fame in the pursuits of literature, and happiness in the
tranquillity of do­

mestic life. War was no longer the passion of the Saracens; and the increase
of

pay, the repetition of donatives, were insufficient to allure the posterity of
those

voluntary champions who had crowded to the standard of Abubeker and Omar

for the hopes of spoil and of paradise.

Under the reign of the Ommiades, the studies of the Moslems were confined

to the interpretation of the Koran, and the eloquence and poetry of their
native-

tongue. A people continually exposed to the dangers of the field must esteem
the

healing powers of medicine, or rather of surgery; but the starving physicians
of

Arabia murmured a complaint, that exercise and temperance deprived them of

the greatest part of their practice. (1) After their civil and domestic wars,
the

subjects of the Abbassides, awakening from this mental lethargy, found
leisure,

and felt curiosity, for the acquisition of profane science. This spirit was
first en­

couraged by the caliph Almansor, who besides his knowledge of the Mahometan

law, had applied himself with success to the study of astronomy. But when the

sceptre devolved to Almamon, the seventh of the Abbassides, he completed the

' designs of his grandfather, and invited the Muses from their ancient seats.
His

ambassadors at Constantinople, his agents in Armenia, Syria and Egypt,
collected

the volumes of the Grecian science: at his command they were translated by the

most skilful interpreters into the Arabic language; his subjects were exhorted
as­

siduously to peruse these instructive writings; and the successor of Mahomet
as­

sisted with pleasure and modesty at the assemblies and disputations of the
learned,

" He was not ignorant," says Abulpharagius, " that they are the elect of God,
his

best and most useful servants, whose lives are devoted to the improvement of
their

rational faculties." The mean ambition of the Chinese and Turks may glory in

the industry of their hands, or the indulgence of their brutal appetites. Vet
these

dexterous artists must view with hopeless emulation, the hexagons and pyramids

of the cells of a bee-hive :(2) these fortitudinous heroes are awed by the
superior

fierceness of the lions and tigers; and in their amorous enjoyments, they are
much

inferior to the vigour of the grossest, and most sordid of the quadrupeds. The

teachers of wisdom are the true luminaries and legislators ot a world, which,

without their aid, would again sink in ignorance and barbarism. "(3) The zeal

and curiosity of Almamon were imitated by succeeding princes of the line of
Ab­

bas: their rivals, the Fatimites of Africa and the Ommiades.of Spain, were the

patrons of the learned, as well as the commanders of the faithful: the same
royal

prerogative was claimed by their independent emirs of the provinces: and their

emulation diffused the taste and the rewards of science from Samarcand and
Bochara

to Fez and Cordova. The vizier of a sultan consecrated a sum of two hundred

thousand pieces of gold to the foundation of a college at Bagdad, which he en­

dowed with an annual revenue of fifteen thousand dinars. The fruits of
instruc­

tion were communicated, perhaps at different times, to six thousand disciples
of

every degree, from the son of the noble to that of the mechanic: a sufficient
al­

lowance was provided for the indigent scholars; and the merit or industry of
the

professors was repaid with adequate stipends. In every city the productions of

Arabic literature were copied and collected by the curiosity of the studious,
and

the vanity of the rich. A private doctor refused the invitation of the sultan
of

Bochara, because the carriage of his books would have required four hundred

camels. The royal library of the Fatimites consisted of one hundred thousand

manuscripts, elegantly transcribed and splendidly bound, which were lent,
with­

out jealousy or avarice, to the students of Cairo. Yet this collection must
appear

moderate, if we can believe that the Ommiades of Spain had formed a library of

six hundred thousand volumes, forty-four of which were employed in the mere

(1) The Gulistau (p. 289.) relates the conversation or Mahomet and* physician,
(Epiitol. Rrnaudot. in Fa,

nciui, Bibliot. G rac. torn. i. p. SIS.) The prophet himself was skilled in
the art of medicine; and Gainier,

Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 354—405.) has given on extract of the aphorisms
which are extant under his name.

(2) See their curious architecture in Resurnar. (Hist, des Insects, torn. v.
Memoire 8.) These hexajrnns av«

elosed by a pyramid; the angles of the three sides of a similar pyramid, such
as would accomplish the given end

with the smallest quantity possible of materials, were determined by a
mathematician, at one hundred and

nine degrees t went) -six mintttes for the larger, seventy degrees thirty-two
minutes for the smaller. The actual

xneuureisone hundred and ninedegrees twunty-eight minutes, seventy degrees
thirty>two minates. Yet thai

perfect harmony raises the work at the expense of the artist; the bees are not
masters of transcendant geometry.

(3) Saed Bbn Ahmed, cadhi of Toledo, who died A. H. 462, A. D. 1069, has
furnished Ahulpharagius.fDjnast.

p. loo.) with this curious passage, as well as with the text of Pocock's
Specimen Historic Arabom. A number

of literary anecdotes of philosophers, physician*, See. who have fitmrisned
under each callplrpswrvtne principal

Aieut uf tne dynssties of A&ut|>haraghif.

Tl!

