86 THE DECLINE AND FALL

Armenian mountains, and whose maritime coast extends about two hundred miles,

from the neighbourhood of Trebizond to Dioscurias and the confines of
Circassia.

Both the soil and climate are relaxed by excessive moisture: twenty-eight
rivers,

besides the Phasis and his dependent streams, convey their waters to the sea;
and

the hollowness of the ground appears to indicate the subterraneous channels
be­

tween the Euxine and the Caspian. In the fields where wheat or barley is sown,

the earth is too soft to sustain the action of the plough; but the gom, a
small grain

not unlike the millet or coriander seed, supplies the ordinary food of the
people;

and the use of bread is confined to the prince and his nobles. Yet the vintage
is

more plentiful than the harvest; and the bulk of the stems, as well as the
quality

of the wine, display the unassisted powers of nature. The same powers continu­

ally tend to overshadow the face of the country with thick forests; the timber
of

the hills, and the flax of the plains, contribute to the abundance of naval
stores;

the wild and the tame animals, the horse, the ox, and the hog, are remarkably

rolific, and the name of the pheasant is expressive of his native habitation
on the

anks of the Phasis. The gold mines to the south of Trebizond, which are still

worked with sufficient profit, were a subject of national dispute between
Justinian

and Chosroes; and it is not unreasonable to believe, that a vein of precious
metal

may be equally diffused through the circle of the hills, although these secret
trea­

sures are neglected by the laziness, or concealed by the prudence, of the
Mingre-

lians. The waters, impregnated with particles of gold, are carefully strained

through sheep-skins or fleeces; but this expedient, the ground-work perhaps of
a

marvellous fable, affords a faint image of the wealth extracted from a virgin
earth

by the power and industry of ancient kings. Their silver palaces and golden

chambers surpass our belief; but the fame of their riches is said to have
excited

the enterprising avarice of the Argonauts. (1) Tradition has affirmed, with
some

colour of reason, that Egypt planted on the Phasis a learned and polite
colony,(2)

which manufactured linen, built navies, and invented geographical maps. The

ingenuity of the moderns has peopled, with flourishing cities and nations, the
isth­

mus between the Euxine and the Caspian;(3) and a lively writer, observing the

resemblance of climate, and in his apprehension of trade, has not hesitated to
pro­

nounce Colchos the Holland of antiquity. (4)

But the riches of Colchos shine only through the darkness of conjecture or
tra­

dition; and its genuine history presents a uniform scene of rudeness and
poverty.

If one hundred and thirty languages were spoken in the market of Dioscurias,
(5)

they were the imperfect idioms of so many savage tribes or families,
sequestered

from each other in the valleys of Mount Caucasus; and their separation, which

diminished the importance, must have multiplied the number, of their rustic
ca­

pitals. In the present state of Mingrelia, a village is an assemblage of huts
within

a wooden fence; the fortresses are seated in the depths of forests; the
princely

town of Cyta, or Cotatis, consists of two hundred houses, and a stone edifice
ap­

pertains only to the magnificence of kings. Twelve ships from Constantinople,

and about sixty barks, laden with the fruits of industry, annually cast anchor
on

the coast; and the list of Colchian exports is much increased, since the
natives had

only slaves and hides to offer in exchange for the corn and salt which they
pur­

chased from the subjects of Justinian. Not a vestige can be found of the art,
the

knowledge, or the navigation, of the ancient Colchians; few Greeks desired or

dared to pursue the footsteps of the Argonauts; and even the marks of an Egyp­

tian colony are lost on a nearer approach. The rite of circumcision is
practised

only by the Mahometans of the Euxine; and the curled hair and swarthy com-

"the Pere Arehangeli Lamberti (Relations de Thevenot, part i. p. 31—52. with a
map.) who has all the know­

ledge and prejudices of a missionary. 2. Of Chardin (Voyages en Perse, tom. i.
p. 54. 68—168,:) his observa­

tions are judicious; and his own adventures in the country are still more
instructive than his observations. 3.

Of Peyssonnel (Observations sur les Peuples Barbares, p. 49—51. 58.62.
64,65.71, &c. and a more recent trea­

tise, Sur les Commerce de la Mer Noire, torn. ii. p. 1—53.:) he had long
resided at CafFa, as consul of France;

and his erudition is less valuable than his experience.

_ (1) Pliny, Hist. Natur. lib. sxxiii. 15. The gold and silver mines of
Colchos attracted the Argonauts (Strab.

lib. i. p. 77.) The sagacious Chardin could find no gold ill mines, rivers, or
elsewhere. Yet a Mingrelian lost

jus hand ami foot for showing some specimens at Constantinople of native gold.

(2) Heiodot. lib. ii. c. 104,105. p. 150,151. Diodor. Sicul. lib. i. p. 38.
edit. Wesseling; Dionys. Ferieget. 689.

and Euslath. ad loc. Scholiast, ad Appollonium Argonaut, lib. iv. 282—291.

(3) Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. xxi. c. 6. L'lsthme . . . convert de
villes et nations que ne font plus*

(4) Bougainville, Memoires de l'Acaderuie des Inscriptions, tom.xxvi. p. 33.
on the African voyage of Hanno

and the commerce of antiquity.

(5) A Greek Historian, Timosthenes, had affirmed, in cam ccc nations
dissimilibus linguis descendere; and

the modest Pliny is content to add, et postea a nostris cxm intcrpretibus
negotia ibi gesta (6,5.;) but the words

nunc deserta cover a multitude of past fictions.

