m THE DECUNE AND KAU.

Arabians disdained the study of any foreign idiom. The Greek interpreters were

chosen among their Christian subjects; they formed the translations, sometimes

on the original text, more frequently perhaps on a Syriac version; and in the
crowd

of astronomers and physicians, there is no example of a poet, an orator, or
even

an historian, being taught to speak the language of the Saracens.(l) The
mytho­

logy of Homer would have provoked the abhorrence of those stern fanatics; they

possessed in lazy ignorance the colonies of the Macedonians, and the provinces
of

Carthage and Rome: theiheroes of Plutarch and Livy were buried in oblivion;
and

the history of the world before Mahomet was reduced to a short legend of the
pa­

triarchs, the prophets, and the Persian kings. Our education in the Greek and

J.atin schools may have fixed in our minds a standard of exclusive taste; and
I am

not forward to condemn the literature and judgments of nations, of whose
language

2 am ignorant. Yet I know that the classics have much to teach, and I believe
that

the orientals have much to learn: the temperate dignity of style, the graceful
pro­

portions of art, the forms of visible and intellectual beauty, the just
delineation of

character and passion, the rhetoric of narrative and argument, the regular
fabric

of epic and dramatic poetry. (2) The influence of truth and reason is of a
less

ambiguous complexion. The philosophers of Athens and Rome enjoyed the bless­

ings and asserted the rights, of civil and religious freedom. Their moral and
po­

litical writings might have gradually unlocked the fetters of eastern
despotism,

diffused a liberal spirit of inquiry and toleration, and encouraged the
Arabian sages

to suspect that their caliph was a tyrant and their prophet an impostor. (3)
The

instinct of superstition was alarmed by the introduction even of the abstract
sci­

ences; and the more rigid doctors of the law condemned the rash and pernicious

curiosity of Almamon.(4) To the thirst of martyrdom, the vision of paradise,

and the belief of predestination, we must ascribe the invincible enthusiasm of
the

prince and people. And the sword of the Saracens became less formidable, when

their youth was drawn away from the camp to the college, when the armies of
the

faithful presumed to read and to reflect. Yet the foolish vanity of the Greeks
was

jealous of their studies, and reluctantly imparted the sacred fire to the
barbarians

of the east. (5)

In the bloody conflict of the Ommiades and Abbassides, the Greeks had stolen

the opportunity of avenging their wrongs, and enlarging their limits. But a
severe

retribution was enacted by Mohadi, the third caliph of the new dynasty,
whoseized

Jn his turn the favourable opportunity, while a woman and a child, Irene and
Con-

stantine, were seated on the Byzantine throne. An army of ninety-five thousand

Persians and Arabs was sent from the Tigris to the Thracian Bosphorus, under
the

command of Harun,(6) or Aaron, the second son of the commander of the faith­

ful His encampment on the opposite heights of Chrysopolis or Scutari, informed

Irene, in her palace of Constantinople, of the loss of her troops and
provinces.

With the consent or connivance of their sovereign, her ministers subscribed an
ig­

nominious peace; and the exchange of some royal gifts could not disguise the
an­

nual tribute of seventy thousand dinars of gold, which was imposed on the
Roman

empire. The Saracens had too rashly advanced into the midst of a distant and

hostile land: their retreat was solicited by the promise of faithful guides
and plen­

tiful markets; and not a Greek had courage to whisper, that their weary forces

night be surrounded and destroyed in their necessary passage between a
slippery

mountain and the river Sangarius. Five years after this expedition, Harun
ascend­

ed the throne of his father, and his elder brother; the most powerful and
vigorous

as, by Tbeophilns, a

yards the end of the

do not believe, that

(1) Abnlpharagius, (Dynast, p. 25.148.) mentions a Syriac version of Homer**
two poems, by"

Christian Maronite of mount Libanus, who protested astronomy at Roha or
Edessa, towr-1-

«lghth century. His work would be a literary cariosity. I have read somewhere,
but I i

pPutaroh's Lives were translated into Turkish for the use of Mahomet the
Second.

(2) I haveperused with much pleasure, Sir 'William Jones1 Latin Commentary on
Asiatic Poetry, (London.

1774, in octavo,) which was composed in the youth of that wonderful linguist.
At present, in the maturity of

his taste and judgment, be would perhaps abate of thefervent, and even
partial, praise which be has bestowed

on Ibe orientals.

(3) Among the Arabian philosophers, Averroes has been accused of despising the
religion of the Jews, the

Christians, and the Mahometans, (See his article in Bayle's Dictionary.) Each
of these sects would agree, that

in two instances out of three, his contempt was reasonable.

(4) D'Herbelot, Brbliotheque Orientate, p. 543.

(5) ©l0t>M» *T07tev xpimi SI T)JVT»V ovtwv yvwff-tv, li tjv TB Pwjuaiav yives
SKUjtM^tTtti axSorev JTOI?[Ttl Ttls ifoeff*!,

tie. Cedrenus, p. 548, who relates how manfully the emperor refused a
mathematician to the instances, and

often of the caliph Almamon. This absurd scruple is expressed almost in the
same words by the eontinuator

of Theopbanea, (Scriptores post Theophanem, p. 118.)

(8) See the reign and character of Harun at Rashid,in flie Ribliotheque
Orientale, p. 431. 433. under his pro*

tier title; and in the relative articles to which M. d'Hcrbelot refers. That
learned collector hai slrowu mucb

xasfein stripping Ore Oriental chronicles of (heir instructive and arjruiirig
antctfotd

