OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

Votion, which were consecrated to the honour of his celestial patrons. In the
re­

formation of the sixteenth century, freedom and knowledge had expanded all the

faculties of man; the thristof innovation superseded the reverence of
antiquity,

and the vigour of Europe could disdain those phantoms which terrified the
sickly

and servile weakness of the Greeks.

The scandal of an abstract heresy can be only proclaimed to the people by the

blast of the ecclesiastical trumpet; but the most ignorant can perceive, the
most

torpid must feel, the profanation and downfall of their visible deities. The
first

hostilities of Leo were directed against a lofty Christ on the vestibule, and
above

the gate, of the palace. A ladder had been planted for the assault, but it was
fu­

riously shaken by a crowd of zealots and women: they beheld with pious trans­

port, the ministers of sacrilege tumbling from on high, and dashed against the

pavement; and the honours of the ancient martyrs were prostituted to these
cri­

minals, who justly suffered for murder and rebellion. (1) '1 he execution of
the im­

perial edict was resisted by frequent tumults in Constantinople and the
provinces:

the person of Leo was endangered, his officers were massacred, and the popular

enthusiasm was quelled by the strongest efforts of the civil and military
power.

Of the Archipelago, or holy see, the numerous islands were filled with images

and monks: their votaries abjured, without scruple, the enemy of Christ, his
mo­

ther, and the saints: they armed a fleet of boats and galleys, displayed their
con­

secrated banners, and boldly steered for the harbour of Constantinople, to
place on

the throne a new favourite of God and the people. They depended on the succour

of a miracle; but their miracles were inefficient against the Greek fire; and,
after

the defeat and conflagration of their fleet, the naked islands were abandoned
to ■

the clemency or justice of the conqueror. The son of Leo, in the first year of
his

Teign, had undertaken an expedition against the Saracens: during his absence,
the

capital, the palace, and the purple, were occupied by his kinsman Artavasdes;
the

ambitious champion of the orthodox faith. The worship of images was triumph­

antly restored; the patriarch renounced his dissimulation, or dissembled his
senti­

ments; and the righteous claim of the usurper was acknowledged, both in the
new

and in ancient Rome. Constantine flew for refuge to his paternal mountains;
but

he descended at the head of the bold and affectionate Isaurians; and his final
vic­

tory confounded the arms and predictions of the fanatics. His long reign was
dis­

tracted with clamour, sedition, conspiracy, and mutual hatred, and sanguinary

revenge: the persecution of images was the motive, or pretence, of his
adversa­

ries; and if they missed a temporal diadem, they were rewarded by the Greeks

with the crown of martyrdom. In every act of open and clandestine treason, the

emperor felt the unforgiving enmity of the monks, the faithful slaves of the
su­

perstition to which they owed their riches and influence. They prayed, they

preached, they absolved, they inflamed, they conspired; the solitude of
Palestine

poured forth a'torrent of invective; and the pen of St. John Damascenus,(2)
the

last of the Greek fathers, devoted the tyrant's head, both in this world and
the

next. (3) I am not at leisure to examine how far the monks provoked, nor how

much they have exaggerated, their real or pretended suffering, nor how many
lost

their lives or limbs, their eyes or their beards, by the cruelty of the
emperor. From

the chastisement of individuals, he proceeded to the abolition of the order;
and,

as is was wealthy and useless, his resentment might be stimulated by avarice
and

justified by patriotism. The formidable name and mission of the Dragon>(<f)
his

visiter general, excited the terror and abhorrence of the black nation: the
religious

•communities were dissolved, the buildings were converted into magazines, or
bar-

0) The holy confessor Theophanes approve* the principle of their rebetion,
kwj.uivci (p. 330.

Gregory II.) in Epist. i. ad Imp. Leon. Concil. torn. viii. p. 661. 664.
applauds tlie zeal of the Byzantine wo­

men who killed the imperial officer!.

(2) John, or Mansur, was a noble Christian of Damascus, who held a
considerable office in the service of the

caliph. His zeal in the cause of images exposed him to the resentment and
treachery of the Greek emperor;

and on the suspicion of a treasonable correspondence, he was deprived cf his
ritsht hand, which was miracu­

lously restored by the Virgin. After this deliverance, he resigned his office,
distributed hit wealth, and buried

himself in the monastery of St. Sabas, between Jerusalem and die Dead Sea. The
legend is famous, but his

learned editor, father Lcquien, has unluckily proved that St. John Damascenus
was already a monk before

the Iconoclast dispute (Oeera. torn. i. Vit. St. Joan. Damascen. p. 10—13. et
Notas ad loc)

(3) After sending Leo to the devil, he introduces hii heir—ro pixw aurov
ysvMMusytsM tij; *»xix; tturcv KJufpo«flssa$

sv **»Ai»ysvaswMf. (Opera Damascen. torn. i. p. 625.) If the authenticity of
this pi *ce he suspicious, we are sure

that in other works, no longer extant, Damascenus bestowed on Constantine the
title of wov Muw^iS X.ieroajs-

X»v,7rer»\»0i'. (toiTt. i. p. 306.) '

(4) In the narrative of this persecution from Theophanes and Cedrenus,
Spanheim (p. 235—238.) is hapnr

to compare the Dracoef Leo with the dragoons (Dra«w») of I.ouis XIV. and
highly solaces himself with this

-<>nrrovcrsial pun.

t

