« 33" OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

adultery was condemned as a capital offence, and fornication in either sex,
was

punished with a hundred stripes.(l) Such were the calm and rational precepts

of the legislator; but in his private conduct, Mahomet indulged the appetites
of a

man, and abused the claims of a prophet. A special revelation dispensed him

from the laws which he had imposed on his nation; the female sex, without re­

serve, was abandoned to his desires; and this singular prerogative excited
the:

envy, rather than the scandal, the veneration rather than the envy, of the
devout'

Mussulmans. If we remember the seven hundred wives and three hundred con­

cubines of the wise Solomon, we shall applaud the modesty of the Arabian, who

espoused no more than seventeen or fifteen wives; eleven are enumerated, who

occupied at Medina their separate apartments round the house of the apostle,
and

enjoyed in their turns the favour of his conjugal society. What is singular
enough,

they were all widows, excepting only Ayesha, the daughter of Abubeker. She

was doubtless a virgin, since Mahomet consummated his nuptials (such is the
pre­

mature ripeness of the climate) when she was only nine years of age. The
youth,

the beauty, the spirit, of Ayesha, gave her a superior ascendant: she was
beloved

and trusted by the prophet; and, after his death, the daughter of Abubeker was

long revered as the mother of the faithful. Her behaviour had been ambiguous

and indiscreet: in a nocturnal march, she was accidentally left behind; and in
the

morning Ayesha returned to the camp with a man. The temper of Mahomet was

inclined to jealousy; but a divine revelation assured him of her innocence: he
chas­

tised her accusers, and published a law of domestic peace, that no woman
should

be condemned unless four male witnesses had seen her in the act of
adultery.(2)

In his adventures with Zeineb, the wife of Zeid, and with Mary, an Egyptian

captive, the amorous prophet forgot the interest of his reputation. At the
house

of Zeid, his freedman and adopted son, he beheld, in a loose undress, the
beauty of

Zeineb, and burst forth into an ejaculation of devotion and desire. The
servile,

or grateful freedman, understood the hint, and yielded without hesitation to
the

love of his benefactor. But as the filial relation had excited some doubt and
scan­

dal, the angel Gabriel descended from heaven to ratify the deed, to annul the

adoption, and gently to reprove the apostle for distrusting the indulgence of
his

God. One of his wives, Hafna, the daughter of Omar, surprised him on her own

bed, in the embraces of his Egyptian captive: she promised secrecy and for­

giveness: he swore that he would renounce the possession of Mary. Both parties

forgot their engagements, and Gabriel again descended with a chapter of the
Ko­

ran, to absolve him from his oath, and to exhort him freely to enjoy his
captives

and concubines, without listening to the clamours of his wives. In a solitary
re­

treat of thirty days, he laboured, alone with Mary, to fulfil the commands of
the

angel. When his love and revenge were satiated, he summoned to his presence

his eleven wives, reproached their disobedience and indiscretion, and
threatened

them with a sentence of divorce, both in this world and the next: a dreadful
sen­

tence, since those who had ascended the bed of the prophet were for ever
excluded

from the hope of a second marriage. Perhaps the incontinence of Mahomet may

be palliated by the tradition of his natural or preternatural gift;(3) he
united the

manly virtue of thirty of the children of Adam; and the apostle might rival
the

thirteenth labour(4) of the Grecian Hercules. (5) A more serious and decent
ex­

cuse may be drawn from his fidelity to Cadijah. During the twenty-four years
of

their marriage, her youthful husband abstained from the right of polygamy, and

the pride or tenderness of the venerable matron was never insulted by the
society

of a rival. After her death, he placed her in the rank of the four perfect
women,

(1) Sale (Preliminary Discourse, p. 133—737.) h«s recapitulated the laws of
marriage, divorce, &c. and the

curions reader of Selden's Uxor Hebraica will recognise many Jewish
ordinances.

(3) In the memorable case, die caliph Omar decided that all presumptive
evidence wa« orno avail; and that

all the roar witnesses most have actually seen strium in pvxide. (Abulfedas
Annates Mosleniici. p. 71. vers.

Reiske.)

(3) Sibi robtir ad generatinnem, quantum triginta viri habent, innesse
jactaret: ita tit unica hora posset un-

deeim fsminis Mtufoeere, nt ex Arabum libris refert Stus PetmsPaschasius, c.
2.(Maracci. Prodromal Alcoran,

p. 4. p. 55.) See likewise observations de Belon, lib. iii. c. 10. fol. 179.
recto.) Al Jannabi (Gagnier, torn. iii. p.

487.) records his own testimony, that he surpassed all men in conjugal vigour;
and Ahulteda mentions the ex­

clamation of Ali, who washed his body after his death,—"O prophetn, certe
penis suus ccelum versus erectus

eat." (in Vit. Mohammed, p. 140.)

(4) I borrow the style of a father of the church, ev*5\su*t- 'HpsexXov;
tjii«j6iSi»*tov «Sxov. (Greg. Nazianzen,

orat. iii. p. 108.)

(5) The common and most glorious legend includes, in a single night, the fifty
victories of Hercules over the

virgin daughters of Thestios. (Diodor. Sicul, torn. i. lib. iv. p. 274.
P.imanias, lib. ix. p. 763. Statins Sylr. lib.

i. eleg. lit. v. 43.) But Athenseus allows seven nights, (Diepnosophist, Kb.
xiii. p. 556.) and Apollndorus fifty,

for this arduous achievement of rlercules, who was then no more than eighteen
years of age. (Bibliot. lib. li.

e. 4. p. 111. eum notis Heyne, part i. p. 333.)

Vol. III. 43

