OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 385

W3us march of seven hundred miles, from the rock of Gibraltar to the bay of

Biscay. The failure of land compelled him to retreat; and he was recalled to

Toledo, to excuse his presumption of subduing a kingdom in the absence of his

general. Spain, which, in a more savage and disorderly state, had resisted,
two

hundred years, the arms of the Romans, was overrun, in a few months, by those

of the Saracens; and such was the eagerness of submission and treaty, that the

governor of Cordova is recorded as the only chief who fell, without
conditions, a

prisoner into their hands. The cause of the Goths had been irrevocably judged

in the field of Xeres; and, in the national dismay, each part of the monarchy
de­

clined a contest with the antagonist who had vanquished the united strength of

the whole.(1) That strength had been wasted by two successive seasons of fa­

mine and pestilence; and the governors, who were impatient to surrender, might

exaggerate the difficulty of collecting the provisions'of a siege. To disarm
the

Christians, superstition likewise contributed her terrors; and the subtle Arab
en­

couraged the report of dreams, omens, and prophecies, and of the portraits of

the destined conquerors of Spain, that were discovered on breaking open an

apartment of the royal palace. Yet a spark of the vital flame was still alive:

some invincible fugitives preferred a life of poverty and freedom in the
Asturian

valleys; the hardy mountaineer repulsed the slaves of the caliph; and the
sword

of Pelagius has been transformed into the sceptre of the catholic kings. (2)

On the intelligence of this rapid success, the applause of Musa degenerated
into

envy; and he began not to complain, but to fear, that Tarik would leave him
no­

thing to subdue. At the head of ten thousand Arabs and eight thousand
Africans,

he passed^jver in person from Mauritania to Spain: the first of his companions

were the noblest of the Koreish; his eldest son was left in the command of
Africa;

the three younger brethren were of an age and spirit to second the boldest
enter­

prises of their father. At his landing in Algezire, he was respectfully
entertained

by count Julian, who stifled his inward remorse, and testified, both in words
and

actions, that the victory of the Arabs had not impaired his attachment to
their

cause. Some enemies yet remained for the sword of Musa. The tardy repent­

ance of the Goths had compared their own numbers and those of the invaders;
the

cities from which the march of Tarik had declined, considered themselves as
im­

pregnable; and the bravest patriots defended the fortifications of Seville and
Meri-

da. They were successively besieged and reduced by the labour of Musa, who

transported his camp from the Bonis to the Anas, from the Gaudalquiver to the

Guadiana. When he beheld the works of Roman magnificence, the bridge, the

aqueducts, the. triumphal arches, and the theatre, of the ancient metropolis
of

Lusitania, " I should imagine," said he to his four companions, " that the
human

race must have united their art and power in the foundation of this city;
happy is

the man who shall become its master!" He aspired to that happiness, but the

JEmerilans sustained on this occasion the honour of their descent from the
veteran

legionaries of Augustus. (3) Disdaining the confinement of their walls, they
gave

battle to the Arabs on the plain; but an ambuscade rising from the shelter of
a

quarry, or a ruin, chastised their indiscretion and intercepted their return,
The

wooden turrets of assault were rolled forwards to the foot of the rampart; but
the

defence of Merida was obstinate and long; and the castle of the martyrs was a
per­

petual testimony of the losses of the Moslems. The constancy f t the besieged

was at length subdued by famine and despair; and the prudent victor disguised
his

impatience under the names of clemency and esteem. The alternative of exile,

or tribute was allowed; the churches were divided between the two religions;
and

the wealth of those who had fallen in the siege, or retired to Gallicia, was
confis­

cated as the reward of the faithful. In the mid-way between Meridd and Toledo,
■

.the lieutenant of Musa saluted the vicegerent of the caliph, and conducted
him to

the palace of the Gothic kings.—Their first interview was cold and formal: a
rigid

account was exacted of the treasures of Spain: tin: character of Tarik was
exposed

to suspicion and obloquy; and the hero was imprisoned, reviled, and
ignoniiniously

(0 Such was the argument of the traitor Oppas, anil every chief to whom it was
addressed did not answer,

with the spirit of Pdagius,—Omnis Hispaniadudum inh uno regiminr
Gothorumtoinnis exereitos Hipani?e in

uno congregatus Ismaelitarum non valuit suslinere impetuni. Chron. Alphonsi
Regis, npud Pagi, torn. iii.

p. 177.

(2) The revival of the Gothic kingdom in the Asturias is distinctly, though
concisely, noticed by d'Anville

(Etats de 1'Europe, p. 159.)

(3) The honourable relics of the Cantabrian war (Dion. Cassiits, lib. liii. p.
720.) wre planted io this metropo­

lis of Lusitania, perhaps of Spain. (Submittit coi tota suos Hispauia fasces.)
Nonius (Hiepaiia, c. 31. p. 106—

no.) enumerates the ancient structures, but concludes with a sigh,—Urhs htec
olim nobilissiraa ad magnam

itieolarum infrtquentiam delapia est. et praterpriscte claritatis ruinas nihil
oitendit.

VOL. III. 49

