274 THE DECLINE AND FALL

cred and profane letters; but his education, his reason, perhaps his
intercourse

with the Jews and Arabs, had inspired the martial peasant with a hatred of
images;

and it was held to be the dijty of a prince, to impose on his subjects the
dictates of

his own conscience. But in the outside of an unsettled reign, during ten years
of

toil and danger, Leo submitted to the meanness of hypocrisy, bowed before the

idols, which he despised, and satisfied the Roman pontiff with the annual
profes­

sions of his orthodoxy and zeal. In the reformation of religion, his first
steps were

moderate and cautious; he assembled a great council of senators and bishops,
and

enacted,, with their consent, that all the images should be removed from the
sanc­

tuary and altar "to a proper height in the churches, where they might be
visible

to the eyes, and inaccessible to the superstition of the people. But it was
impossi­

ble on either side to check the rapid though adverse impulse of veneration and
ab­

horrence: in their lofty position, the sacred images still edified their
votaries and

reproached the tyrant. He was himself provoked by resistance find invective;

and his own party accused him of an imperfect discharge of his duty, and
urged,

for his imitation, the example of the Jewish king, who had broken without
scruple

the brazen serpent of the temple. By a second edict, he proscribed the
existence

as well as the use of religious pictures; the churches of Constantinople and
the pro­

vinces were cleansed from idolatry; the images of Christ, the Virgin, and the

saints, were demolished, or a smooth surface of plaster was spread over the
walls

of the edifice. The sect of the Iconoclasts was supported by the zeal and
despo­

tism of six emperors, and the east and west were involved in a noisy conflict
of one

hundred and twenty years. It was the design of Leo the Isaurian to pronounce

the condemnation of images, as an article of faith, and by the authority of a
gene­

ral council: but the convocation of such an assembly was reserved for his son
Con-

stantine;(l) and though it is stigmatized by triumphant bigotry as a meeting
of fools

and atheists, their own partial and mutilated acts betray many symptoms of
rea­

son and piety. The debates and decrees of many provincial synods introduced
the

summons of the general council which met in the suburbs of Constantinople and

was composed of a respectable number of three hundred and thirty-eight bishops

ef Europe and Anatolia; for the patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria were the

slaves of the caliph, and the Roman pontiff had withdrawn the churches of
Italy

and the west from the communion of the Greeks. This Byzantine synod assumed

the rank and powers of the seventh general council; yet even this title was a
re­

cognition of the six preceding assemblies which had laboriously built the
structure

of the catholic faith. After a serious deliberation of six months, the three
hun­

dred and thirty-eight bishops pronounced and subscribed a unanimous decree,
that

all visible symbols of Christ, except in the eucharist, were either
blasphemous or

heretical; that image-worship was a corruption of Christianity and a renewal
of

paganism; that all such monuments of idolatry should be broken or erased; and

that those who should refuse to deliver the objects of their private
superstition,

were guilty of disobedience to the authority of the church and of the emperor.
In

their loud and loyal acclamations, they celebrated the merits of their
temporal re­

deemer; and to his zeal and justice they intrusted the execution of their
spiritual

censures. At Constantinople, as in the former councils, the will of the prince
was

the rule of episcopal faith: but, on this occasion, I am inclined to suspect,
that a

large majority of the prelates sacrificed their secret conscience to the
temptations

of hope and fear. In the long night of superstition, the Christians had
wandered'

far away from the simplicity of the gospel, nor was it easy for them to
discern the

clue, and tread back the mazes of the labyrinth. The worship of images was in­

separably blended, at least to a pious fancy, with the cross, the Virgin, the
saints,

and their relics; the holy ground was involved in a cloud of miracles and
visions;

and the nerves of the mind, curiosity and scepticism, were benumbed by the ha­

bits of obedience and belief. Constantine himself is accused of indulging a
royal

license to doubt, to deny, or deride, the mysteries of the catholics,(2) but
they

were deeply inscribed in the public and private creed of his bishops; and the
bold­

est Iconoclast might assault, with a secret horror, the monuments of popular
de­

ft) Some flowers of rhetoric are Eouvoaoy raprfrouw x*i «d£ov,and the bishops
t&i? nxruaQptinv. By Damascene

itis styled axupo; xsei mJshts;. (Opera, torn. i. p. 623.) Spanheim's Apology
for the Synod of Constantinople (p.

171, &c.) is worked up with truth and ingenuity, from such materials as be
could find in the Nicene Acts. (p.

1046, &c.) The witty John of Damascus converts ea-irxosrou; into stidcotcu;,
makes them xotMoJatAoti;, slaves

of their belly, &c. % Opera, torn, i. p. 306.

(2) He is accused of proscribiiifr the title of saint; styling the Virgin,
mother of Christ; comparing her after

her delivery to an empty purse; of Arianism, Nestorhmism, &c In his defence,
Spanheim (c, 4, p. 207.) is

somewhat embarrassed between the interest of a protcitant and the duty of an
orthodox divine.

