48 THE DECLINE AND FALL

fortune is confounded with the meanest of his vassals. (1) The name and si­

tuation of this unhappy people might indicate their descent from one common

stock with the conquerors of Africa. But the use of a Sclavonian dialect

more clearly represents them as the last remnant of the new colonies, who suc­

ceeded to the genuine Vandals, already scattered or destroyed in the age of
Proco-

pius.(2)

If Belisarius had been tempted to hesitate in his allegiance, he might have
urged,

even against the emperor himself, the indispensable duty of saving Africa from
an

enemy more barbarous than the Vandals. The origin of the Moors is involved

in darkness; they were ignorant of the use of letters. (3) Their limits cannot
be

precisely defined: a boundless continent was open to the Lybian shepherds; the

change of seasons and pastures regulated their motions; and their rude huts
and

slender furniture were transported with the same ease as their arms, their
families,

and their cattle, which consisted of sheep, oxen, and camels. (4) During the
vi­

gour of the Roman power, they observed a respectful distance from Carthage and

the sea-shore; under the feeble reign of the Vandals, they invaded the cities
of

Numidia, occupied the sea-coast from Tangier to Cxsaria; and pitched their
camps,

with impunity, in the fertile province of Byzacium. The formidable strength

whose vanity aspired to receive, in the emperor's name, the ensigns of their
regal

dignity. (5) They were astonished by the rapid event, and trembled in the pre­

sence of their conqueror. But his approaching departure soon relieved the ap­

prehensions of a savage and superstitious people; the number of their wives
al­

lowed them to disregard the safety of their infant hostages; and when the
Roman

general hoisted sail in the port of Carthage, he heard the cries, and almost
beheld

the flames, of the desolated province. Yet he persisted in his resolution;
and,

leaving only a part of his guards to re-enforce the feeble garrisons, he
intrusted the

command of Africa to the eunuch Solomon,(6) who proved himself not unworthy

to be the successor of Belisarius. In the first invasion, some detachments,
with

two officers of merit, were surprised and intercepted; but Solomon speedily
as­

sembled his troops, marched from Carthage into the heart of the country, and
in

two great battles destroyed sixty thousand of the barbarians.

The Moors depended on their multitude, their swiftness, and their inaccessible

mountains; and the aspect and smell of their camels are said to have produced

some confusion in the Roman cavalry.(7) But as soon as they were commanded

to dismount, they derided this contemptible obstacle: as soon as the columns
as­

cended the hills, the naked and disorderly crowd was dazzled by glittering
arms

and regular evolutions; and the menace of their female prophets was repeatedly

fulfilled, that the Moors should be discomfited by a beardless antagonist. The

victorious eunuch advanced thirteen days'journey from Carthage, to besiege
mount

Aurasius,(8) the citadel, and at the same time the garden, of Numidia. The
range

of hills, a branch of the great Atlas, contains, within a circumference of one
hun-

(1) From the mouth of the great elector (in 1687.) Tollius describes the
secret royalty anil rebellious spirit or

the Vandals of Brandenburg!), who could muster live or six thousand soldiers
who had procured some canon,

&c. (Itinerar. Hungar. p. 42. apud Dubos,Hist. dela Monarchic Francoise, torn.
i. p. 182,183.) The veracity,

not of the elector, but of Tollius himself, may justly be suspected.

(2) Procopius (lib. i. c. 22.) was in total darkness—QvStpvnt** ou£, ovc/«e e;
t,us <rto&r«i. Under the reign of

Dagobert,(A. D. 630.) the Sclavonian tribes of the Sorbi and Venedi already
bordered on Thuringia. (Mas-

con. Hist, of the Germans, 15.3—5.)

(3) Sallust represents the Moors as a remnant of the army of Heracles, (de
Bell. Jugurth. c. 21.) and Proco­

pius, (Vandal, fib. ii. e. 10.) as the posterity of the Cananaeans who fled
from the robber Joshua {yurrtK.) He

quotes two columns, with a Phoenician inscription. I believe in the columns—I
doubt the inscription—and X

reject the pedigree.

(4) Virgil (Georgic. 3. 339.) and Pomponiu9 Mela, (1.8.) describe the
wandering life of the African shepherds,

similar to that of the Arabs aud Tartars; aud Shaw (p. 222.) is the best
commentator on the poet and the geo­

grapher.

(5) The customary gifts were a sceptre, a crown or a cap, a white cloak, a
figured tunicand shoes,all adorned

with gold and silver; nor were these precious metals less acceptable in the
shape of coin. (Procop. Vandal, i.

c.25.)

(6) See the African government and warfare of Solomon, in Procopius. (Vandal,
lib. ii. e. 10—13.19,20.)

He was recalled, and again restored; and his last victory dates in the
thirteenth year of Justinian (A. IX 539.)

An accident in his childhood had rendered him a eunuch: (lib. i. c. 2.) the
other Roman generals were amply

furnished with beards, *a>yovos swi ■ a^iwi, (lib ii. c. 8.)

(7) This natural antipathy of the horse for the camel, is affirmed by the
ancients (Xenophon, Cyropsed. lib.

vi. p. 438; lib. vii. p. 483.492. edit. Hutchinson. Polyaen. Stratagem, vii.
6. Plin. Hist. Nat. viii. 26. Alian

sle Natur. Animal, lib. iii. c. 7..) but it is disproved, by daily experience,
and derided by the best judges, the

Orientals. (Voyage d'Olearius, p. 553.)

(8) Procopius is the first who describes Mount Aurasius. Vandal, lib. ii. c.
13. De Edilic. lib. vi. c. 7.) He

may be compared with Leo Africanus, (dell Africa, parte 5. in Bamusio, torn.
i. fol. 77, recto,) Marmo), (torn,

ii. p. 430.) and Shaw, (p. 56-59.)

neutrality of the Moorish princes,

