A THE DECLINE AND FALL

distinguished from another emperor of the same family and name, ascended the

Byzantine throne at the age of sixty-eight years; and, had he been left to his
own

guidance, every moment of a nine year's reign must have exposed to his
subjects

the impropriety of their choice. His ignorance was similar to that of
Theodoric;

and, it is remarkable, that in an age not destitute of learning, two
cotemporary

monarchs had never been instructed in the knowledge of the alphabet. But the

genius of Justin was far inferior to that of the Gothic king: the experience
of a sol­

dier had not qualified him for the government of an empire; and, though
person­

ally brave, the consciousness of his own weakness was naturally attended with

doubt, distrust, and political apprehension. But the official business of the
state

was diligently and faithfully transacted by the questor Proclus;(l) and the
aged

emperor adopted the talents and ambition of his nephew Justinian, an aspiring

youth, whom his uncle had drawn from the ructic solitude of Dacia, and
educated

at Constantinople; as the heir of his private fortune, and at length of the
eastern

empire.

Since the eunuch Amantius had been defrauded of his money, it became ne­

cessary to deprive him of his life. The task was easily accomplished by .the

charge of a real or fictitious conspiracy; and the judges were informed, as an
ac­

cumulation of guilt, that he was secretly addicted to the Manichxan heresy.(2)

Amantius lost his head; three of his companions, the first domestics of the
palace,

were punished either with death or exile; and their unfortunate candidate for
the

purple was cast into a deep dungeon, overwhelmed with stones, and
ignominiously

thrown, without burial, into the sea. The ruin of Vitalian was a work of more
diffi­

culty and danger. That Gothic chief had rendered himself popular by the civil
war

which he boldly waged against Anastasius for the defence of tlie orthodox
faith, and

after the conclusion of an advantageous treaty, he still remained in the
neighbour­

hood of Constantinople, at the head of a formidable and victorious army of
barba­

rians. By the frail security of oaths, he was tempted to relinquish this
advantageous

situation, and to trust his person within the walls of a city, whose
inhabitants, parti­

cularly the blue faction, were artfully incensed against him by the
remembrance

even of his pious hostilities. The emperor and his nephew embraced him as the

faithful and worthy champion of the church and state; and gratefully adorned
their

favourite with the titles of consul and general; but in the seventh month of
his

consulship, Vitalian was stabbed with seventeen wounds at the royal
banquet;(3)

and Justinian, who inherited the spoil, was accused as the assassin of a
spiritual

brother, to whom he had recently pledged his faith in the participation of the

Christian mysteries. (4) After the fall of his rival, he was promoted, without
any

claim of military service, to the office of master general of the eastern
armies,

whom it was his duty to lead into the field against the public enemy. But, in
the

pursuit of fame, Justinian might have lost his present dominion over the age
and

weakness of his uncle; and instead of acquiring by Scythian or Persian
trophies

the applause of his countrymen,(5) the prudent warrior solicited their favour
in

the churches, the circus, and the senate of Constantinople. The catholics were

attached to the nephew of Justin, who, between the Nestorian and Eutvchian he­

resies, trod the narrow path of inflexible and intolerant orthodoxy. (6) in
the first

days of the new reign, he prompted and gratified the popular enthusiasm
against

the memory of the deceased emperor. After a schism of thirty-four vears, he
re­

conciled the proud and angry spirit of the Roman pontiff, and spread among the

Latins a favourable report of his pious respect for the apostolic see. The
thrones

of the east were filled with catholic bishops devoted to his interest, the
clergy

and the monks were gained by his liberality, and the people were taught to
pray

for their future sovereign, the hope and pillar of the true religion. The
magnifi-

(1) His virtues are praised by Procopius (Persic, lib. i. c. II.) Tlie questor
Proclus was the friend of Justi­

nian, and the enemy of every other adoption.

(J) Manichiean signifies Eutychian, Hear tbe furious acclamations of
Constantinople and Tyre, tlie far-

memo more than six days after the deerae of Anastasius. They produced, the
latter ajiplauded the eu­

nuch s death (Baromus, A. D. 518. v. 2. No. 15. Fleury, Hi«t. Ecclcs. torn.
vii. p. 200. 205. from the councils,

torn. v. p. 182.207.) r *

(3) His power, character, and intentions, are perfectly explained by the Count
de Buat (torn. ix. p. S4—81.)

He was gi-eat-grandson of Aspar.bereditary prince in the Lesser Scythia.and
count of the Gothic/oaierati of

Thrace. The Bessi, whom be could influence, and tbe minor Goths of Jornandea
(c. 51.)

(4) Justinian patnen facuone dicitur interfectus fuisse (Victor Tununensis,
Qhron. in Thesaur. Temp. Sca-

liger, p. 2.7.) Procopius (Anecdot. c. 7.) styles him a tyrant, but
acknowledges the aSiJuMimrrw, which is well

explained by Alemnnnus.

(5) In his earliest youth (plane adolescens) he had passed some time as a
hostage with Theodoric. Fortius

curious fact, Alcniannui (ad Procon. Anecdot. c. 9. p. 34. of the first
edition) quotes a MS. history of Justinian

by li" preceptor 1 heophilus. Ludewig (p. 143.) wishes to make him a soldier.

(6) Tbe ecclesiastical history of Justinian will be shown hereafter. See
Baronius. A. D.5I8-521. and the

copious article Juattmamsm the index to the seventh volume of his Annals.

