THE BECLINE AND FALL

good man may deceive others, how the conscience may slumber in a mixed and

middle state between self-illusion and voluntary fraud. Charity may believe
that

the original motives of Mahomet were those of pure and genuine benevolence;

but a human missionary is incapable of cherishing the obstinate unbelievers
who

reject his claims, despise his arguments, and persecute liis life; he might
forgive

his personal adversaries, he may lawfully hate the enemies of God; the stern

passions of pride and revenge were kindled in the bosom of Mahomet, and he

sighed like the prophet of Nineveh, for the destruction of the rebels whom he

had condemned. The injustice of Mecca, and the choice of Medina, transformed

the citizen into a prince, the humble preacher into the leader of armies; but
his

sword was consecrated by the example of the saints; and the same God who af­

flicts a sinful world with pestilence and earthquakes, might inspire for their
con­

version, or chastisement, the valour of his servants. In the exercise of
political

government, he was compelled to abate of the stern rigour of fanaticism, to
com­

ply, in some measure, with the prejudices and passions of his followers, and
to

employ even the vices of mankind as the instruments of their salvation. The
use

of fraud and perfidy, of cruelty and injustice, were often subservient to the
propa­

gation of the faith; and Mahomet commanded or approved the assassination of

the Jews and idolaters who had escaped from the field of battle. By the
repeti­

tion of such acts, the character of Mahomet must have been gradually stained;

. and the influence of such pernicious habits would be poorly compensated by
the

practice of the personal and social virtues, which are necessary to maintain
the

reputation of a prophet among his sectaries and friends. Of his last years,
ambi­

tion was the ruling passion; and a politician will suspect, that he secretly
smiled

(the victorious impostor!) at the enthusiasm of his youth, and the credulity
of his

proselytes. (1) A philosopher would observe that their cruelty and his success

■would tend more strongly to fortify the assurance of his divine mission, that
his

interest and religion were inseparably connected, and that his conscience
would

be soothed by the persuasion, that he alone was absolved by the Deity from the

obligation of positive and moral laws. If he retained any vestige of his
native in­

nocence, the sins of Mahomet may be allowed as the evidence of his sincerity.

In the support of truth, the arts of fraud and fiction may be deemed less
crimi­

nal; and he would have started at the foulness of the means, had he not been
sa­

tisfied of the importance and justice of the end. Even in a conqueror, or a
priest,

I can surprise a word or action of unaffected humanity; and the decree of
Maho­

met, that, in the sale of captives, the mother should never be separated from

her children, may suspend or moderate the censure of the historian. (2)

The good sense of Mahomet(3) despised the pomp of royalty; the apostle of

God submitted t;o the menial offices of the family; he kindled the fire, swept
the

floor, milked the ewes, and mended with his own hands his shoes and his
woollen

garment. Disdaining the penance and merit of a hermit, he observed without ef­

fort or vanity, the abstemious diet of an Arab and a soldier. On solemn
occasions

he feasted his companions with rustic and hospitable plenty; but in his
domestic

life, many weeks would elapse without a fire being kindled on the hearth of
the

prophet. The interdiction of wine was confirmed by his example; his hunger was

appeased with a sparing allowance of barley-bread; he delighted in the taste
of

milk and honey; but his ordinary food consisted of dates and water. Perfumes
and

women were the two sensual enjoyments which his nature required, and his re­

ligion did not forbid: and Mahomet affirmed, that the fervour of his devotion
was

increased by these innocent pleasures. The heat of the climate inflames the
blood

of the Arabs; and their libidinous complexion has been noticed by the writers
of

antiquity. (4) Their incontinence was regulated by the civil and religious
laws of

the Koran: their incestuous alliances were blamed, the boundless license of
poly­

gamy was reduced to four legitimate wives or concubines; their rights both of
bed

and of dowry were equitably determined; the freedom of divorce was
discouraged,

(1) In some passage of his voluminous writings, Voltaire compares the prophet,
in his old age to a fakir,—

" qui detaebi le cbaine de son cou pour en donner sur les oreilles a ses
confreres."

(2) Gagnier relates, with the same impartial pen, this humane law of the
prophet, and the murders of Caab

and Sophian, which he prompted and approved (Vie de Mahomet, torn. ii. p. 69.
97.208.)

(3) For the domestic life of Mahomet, consult Gagnier, and the corresponding
chapters of Ahulfeda: for his

diet (torn. iii. p. 285—288.) his children (p. 189—289.) his wives (p.
290—303.) his marriage with Zeineb (mm. ii.

p. 152—160.) his amour with Mary (303—309.) the false accusation of Ayesha (p.
185—199. The most original

evidence of the three lasttransactions,is contained in the twenty-fourth,
thirty-third, and sixty-sixth chapters of

the Koran, with Sale's commentary. Prideanx (Lire of Mahomet, p. 80—90,) and
Maracci (Prodrom. Alcoran,

part iv. p. 49—59.) have maliciously exaggerated the frailties of Mahomet.

(4) Incredibile est quo ardorc apud cos in venercm uturque solvitur sexus
(Aromian, Marcellin. lib. xiv. c. 4.)

