OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. SI

Will as the only rule of moral obligation The studies of Chosroes were osten­

tatious and superficial: but his example awakened the curiosity of an
ingenious

people, and the light of science was diffused over the dominions of Persia.
(2) At

Gondi Sapor, in the neighbourhood of the royal city of Susa, an academy of
phy­

sic was founded, which insensibly became a liberal school of poetry,
philosophy,

and rhetoric. (3) The annals of the monarchy (4) were composed; and while re­

cent and authentic history might afford some useful lessons both to the prince
and

people, the darkness of the first ages was embellished by the giants, the
dragons,

and the fabulous heroes of oriental romance. (5) Every learned or confident
stran­

ger was enriched by the bounty, and flattered by the conversation, of the
monarch :

he nobly rewarded a Greek physician,(6) by the deliverance of three thousand

captives; and the sophists who contended for his favour, were exasperated by
the

wealth and insolence of Uranius, their more successful rival. Nushirvan be­

lieved, or at least respected, the religion of the Magi; and some traces of
persecu­

tion may be1 discovered in his reign. (7) Yet he allowed himself freely to
compare

the tenets of the various sects; and the theological disputes in which he
frequent­

ly presided, diminished the authority of the priest, and enlightened the minds
of

the people. At his command, the most celebrated writers of Greece and India

were translated into the Persian language; a smooth and elegant idiom, recom­

mended by Mahomet to the use of paradise; though it is branded with the epi­

thets of savage and unmusical, by the ignorance and presumption of
Agathias.(8)

Yet the Greek historian might reasonably wonder, that it should be found
possi­

ble to execute an entire version of Plato and Aristotle in a foreign dialect,
which

had not been framed to express the spirit of freedom and the subtleties of
philo­

sophic disquisition. And, if the reason of the Stagyrite might be equally
dark,

or equally intelligible, in every tongue, the dramatic art and verbal
argumentation

of the disciple of Socrates,(9) appear to be indissolubly mingled with the
grace

and perfection of his Attic style. In the search of universal knowledge,
Nushir­

van was informed, that the moral and political fables of Pilpay, an ancient
Brach-

man, were preserved with jealous reverence among the treasures of the kings of

India. The physician Perozes was secretly despatched to the banks of the Gan­

ges, with instructions to procure, at any price, the communication of this
valuable

work. His dexterity obtained a transcript, his learned diligence accomplished

the translation; and the fables of Pilpay (10) were read and admired in the
assem­

bly of Nushirvan and his nobles. The Indian original, and the Persian copy,
have

long since disappeared: but this venerable monument has been saved by the
curi­

osity of the Arabian caliphs, revived in the modern Persic, the Turkish, the
Sy-

riac, the Hebrew, and the Greek idioms, and transfused through successive ver­

sions into the modern languages of Europe. In their present form, the peculiar

(1) A thousand years before his birth, the judges of Persia had [given a
solemn opinion—ra B*;*a.iu:tT* n. p-

a-inv ^i-sivsei jro*f jiv to av BwMrai (Herodot. lib. w. c. 31. p. 210. edit.
Wesseling.) Nor had this constitutional

maxim been neglected as a useless and barren theory.

(2) On the literary state of Persia, the Greek versions, philosophers,
sophists, the learning or ignorance of

Chosroes, Agathias (lib. ii.c. 66—71.) displays much information and strong
prejudices.

(3) Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 745—7-17.

(4) The Shah Nameh, or Bonk of Kings, is perhaps the original record of
history which was translated into

Greek by the interpreter Sergius (Agathias, lib. v. p. 14!..) preserved after
the Mahometan conquest, and ver­

sified in the year 994, by the national poet Ferdoussi. See d'Anquetil (Mem.
de I'Academic, torn. xxxi. p. 379.)

and Sir William Jones (Hist, of Nader Shah, p. 161.)

(5) In the fifth century, the name of Restotn or Rostam, a hero who equalled
the strength of twelve ele­

phants, was familiar to the Armenians (Moses Choronensis. Hist. Armen. lib.
ii. c. 7. p. 96. edit. Whiston.) In

the beginning of the seventh, the Persian Romance of Rostam and lsfendiar was
applauded at Mecca (Sale's

Koran, c. xxxi. p. 335.) Yet this exposition of Indicium novte historian is
not given by Maracci (Refutat. Alco­

ran, p. 544—548.)

(6) Procop. Goth. lib. iv. c. 10. Kobad had a favourite Greek physician,
Stephen of Edessa, (Persic, lib. ii.

c. 26:) The practice was ancient; and Herodotus relates the adventures of
Democedes of Crotona (lib. in. c«

125—137.)

(7) Sec Pagi, torn. ii. p. 626. In one of the treaties an honourable article
was inserted for the toleration and

burial of the catholics (Menander, in Excerpt. Legat. p. 142.) Nushizad, a son
of Nushirvan, was a Christian,

a rebel, and—a martyr (D'Herbelot, p. 681.)

(8) On the Persian language, and its three dialects, consult d'Anquetil (p.
339—343.) and Jones (p. 153—185.:)

fcyfux t*m y K'ji-nti «»* a^us-or*™, is the character which Agathias (lib. ii.
p. 66.) ascribes to an idiom in the east

for poetical softness.

(9) Agathias specifies the Georgias, Phaedon, Parmenides, and Timgeus.
Renftudot (Fabricius, Bibliot. Grsec.

torn. xii. p. 246—261.) does not mention this barbaric version of Aristotle.

(10) Of these tables, I have seen three copies in three different languages.
1. In Greek, translated by Simeon

Seth (A. D. 1100.,) from the Arabic, and published by Starck, at Berlin, in
1697, in 12mo. 2. In Latin, a

version from the Greek, Sapientia Indorum, inserted by Pere Poussin at the end
of his edition of Pachymer

( p. 547—620. edit. Roman.) 3. In French, from the Turkish, dedicated, in
1540, to sultan Soliman. Contes et

Fables Indiennes de Bidpal et de Lokraan, par M. M. Galland et Cardonne,
Paris, 1778, 3 vols, in 12mo. Mr.

"Wharton (History of English poetry, vol. i. p. 129—131.) takes a larger
scupe.

Vol. III. 11

