20 THE DECLINE AND FALL

tracted, and the heavy interest which he paid. A sense of the disgrace and
mis*

chief of this venal practice, at length awakened the slumbering virtue of
Justinian j

and he attempted, by the sanction of oaths(l) and penalties, to guard the
integrity

of his government: but at the end of a year of perjury, his rigorous edict was
sus­

pended, and corruption licentiously abused her triumph over the importance of
the

laws. VI. The testament of Eulalius, count of the domestics, declared the
empe­

ror his sole heir, on condition, however, that he should discharge his debts
and le­

gacies, allow to his three daughters a decent maintenance, and bestow each of
them

in marriage, with a portion of ten pounds of gold. But the splendid fortune of
Eu­

lalius had been consumed by fire; and the inventory of his goods did not
exceed the

trifling sum of five hundred and sixty-four pieces of gold. A similar instance
in

Grecian history, admonished the emperor of the honourable part prescribed for

his imitation. He checked the selfish murmurs of the treasury, applauded the

confidence of his friend, discharged the legacies and debts, educated the
three vir­

gins under the eye of the empress Theodora, and doubled the marriage-portion

which had satisfied the tenderness of their father. (2) The humanity of a
prince

(for princes cannot be generous) is entitled to some praise; yet even in this
act of

virtue we may discover the inveterate custom of supplanting the legal or
natural

heirs, which Procopius imputes to the reign of Justinian. His charge is
supported

by eminent names and scandalous examples; neither widows nor orphans were

spared; and the art of soliciting, or extorting, or supposing testaments, was
benefi­

cially practised by the agents of the palace. This base and mischievous
tyranny

invades the security of private life; and the monarch, who has indulged an
appe­

tite for gain, will soon be tempted to anticipate the moment of succession, to
inter­

pret wealth as an evidence of guilt, and to proceed, from the claim of
inheritance,

to the power of confiscation. VII. Among the forms of rapine, a philosopher
may

be permitted to name the conversion of pagan or heretical riches to the use of
the

faithful; but in the time of Justinian this holy plunder was condemned by the
sec­

taries alone, who became the victims of his orthodox avarice. (3)

Dishonour might be ultimately reflected on the character of Justinian; but

touch of the guilt, and still more of the profit, was intercepted by the
ministers,

who were seldom promoted for their virtues, and not ahvavs selected for their
ta­

lents. (4) The merits of Tribonian the questor will hereafter be weighed in
the

reformation of the Roman law; but the economy of the east was subordinate to

the pretorian prefect, and Procopius has justified his anecdotes by the
portrait

■which he exposes in his public history, of the notorious vices of John of
Cappa-

docia.(5) His knowledge was not borrowed from the schools,(6) and his style

was scarcely legible; but he excelled in the powers of native genius, to
suggest

the wisest counsels* and to find expedients in the most desperate situations.
The

corruption of his heart was equal to the vigour of his understanding. Although

he was suspected of magic and pagan superstition, he appeared insensible to
the

fear of God or the reproaches of man; and his aspiring fortune was raised on
the

death of thousands, the poverty of millions, the ruin of cities, and the
desolation

of provinces. From the dawn of light to the moment of dinner, he assiduously

laboured to enrich his master and himself at the expense of the Roman world;

the remainder of the day was spent in sensual and obscene pleasures, and the
si­

lent hours of the night were interrupted by the perpetual dread of the justice
of

an assassin. His abilities, perhaps his vices, recommended him to the lasting

friendship of Justinian: the emperor yielded with reluctance to the fury of
the

people; his victory was displayed by the immediate restoration of their enemy;

and they felt above ten years, under his oppressive administration, that he
was

stimulated by(revenge, rather than instructed by misfortune. Their murmurs

served only to fortify the resolution of Justinian; but the prefect, in the
insolence

of favour, provoked the resentment of Theodora, disdained a power, before
which

(1) The oath is conceived in the most Formidable words (Novell, vlii. lit. 3.)
Tlie defaulters imprecate oh

themselves, quicquid habent telorum armamentaria cceli: the part of Judas, the
leptosy of Gehazi, the tremor

of Cain, etc. besides all temporal pains.

(2) A similar or more generous aet of friendship, is related by Lucian of
Eudamidat of Corinth, (in Toxare

c. 22,23. torn. ii. p. 530.) and the story has produced an ingenious, though
feeble comedy of Fontenelle.

(3) John Malafa, torn. ii. p. 101—103.

(4) One of these, Anatnlius, perished in an earthquake—doubtless a judgment!
The complaints and ehr-

Tnours of the people in Agathias, (lib. v. p. 146, 147.) are almost an echo of
the anecdote. The aliena pecu-

nia reddendanf Coripput, (lib. ii. 381, fee.,) is not very honourable to
Justinian's memory.

(5) See the history and character of John of Cappadocia io Procopius. (Persic.
lib. i. c. 24,2J. lib. ii. c. 30.

Vandal, lib. i. c. 13. Anccdot. c. ii. 17.22.) The agreement of the history
and anecdotes is a mortal wound to

the reputation of the prefect.

(6) Ov yup mKKa o<jfcv £; yfZfipx-rijiov; (pciTaJV £«x5jv cti fa ypxp.uxTx,
xzi t«'jtcs xxhx xsxws yoa^ai—a forci­

ble expression.

