36 THE DECLINE AND FALL

wardice was seldom exposed to military service. But the wiser citizens, who

judged of the future by the past, revolved in their memory the immense loss,
both

of men and money, which the empire had sustained in the expedition of Basilis-

cus. The troops, which after five laborious campaigns had been recalled from

the Persian frontier, dreaded the sea, the climate, and the arms of an unknown

enemy. The ministers of the finances computed, as far as they might compute,

the demands of an African war; the taxes which must be found and levied to
sup­

ply those insatiate demands; and the danger, lest their own lives, or at least
their

lucrative employments, should be made responsible for the deficiency of the
sup­

ply. Inspired by such selfish motives, (for we may not suspect him of any zeal

for the public good,) John of Cappadocia ventured to oppose in full council
the in­

clinations of his master. He confessed, that a victory of such importance
could

not be too dearly purchased; but he represented in a grave discourse the
certain,

difficulties and the uncertain event. You undertake (said the prefect) to
besiege

Carthage by land; the distance is not less than one hundred and forty days|
jour­

ney; on the sea, a whole year(l) must elapse before you can receive any
intelli­

gence from your fleet. If Africa should be reduced, it cannot be preserved
with­

out the additional conquest of Sicily and Italy. Success will impose the
obliga­

tion of new labours; a single misfortune will attract the barbarians into the
heart

of your exhausted empire. Justinian felt the weight of this salutary advice,
he

was confounded by the unwonted freedom of, an obsequious servant; and the de­

sign of the war would perhaps have been relinquished, if his courage had not

been revived by a voice which silenced the doubts of profane reason. " I have

seen a vision (cried m artful or fanatic bishop of the east.) "It is the will
of

Heaven, O emperor; f*at you Should not abandon your holy enterprise for the
de­

liverance of the African church. The god of battles will inarch before your

standard, and disperse ymr enemies, who are the enemies of his, Son." The

emperor might be tempted, and his counsellors were constrained, to give credit

to this seasonable revelation: but they derived more rational hope from the
re­

volt, which the adherents of Hilderic or Athanasius had already excited on the

borders of the Vandal monarchy. Prudentius, an African subject, had privately-

signified his royal intentions, and a small military am restored the province
of

Tripoli to the obedience of the Romans. The government of Sardinia had been

intrusted to Godas, a valiant barbarian; he suspended the payment of tribute,
dis­

claimed his allegiance to the usurper, and gave audience to the emissaries of
Jus­

tinian, who found him master of that fruitful island, at the head of his
guards,

and proudly invested with the ensigns of royalty. The forces of the Vandals

were diminished by discord and suspicion; the Roman armies were animated by

the spirit of Belisarius; one of those heroic names which are familiar to
every age

and to every nation.

The Africanus of new Rome was born, and perhaps educated, among the Thra-

cian peasants,(2) without any of those advantages which had formed the virtues
of

the elder and the younger Scipio; a noble origin, liberal studies, and the
emulation

of a free state. The silence ot a loquacious secretary may be admitted, to
prove

that the youth of Belisarius could not afford any subject of praise; he served
most as­

suredly, with valour and reputation, among the private guards of Justinian;
and

when his patron became emperor, the domestic was promoted to military com­

mand. After a bold inroad into Persarmenia, in which his glory was shared by a

colleague, and his progress was checked by an enemy, Belisarius repaired to
the

important station of Dara, where he first accepted the service of Procopius,
the

faithful companion, and diligent historian, of his exploits. (3) The Mirranes
of

Persia advanced, with forty thousand of her best troops, to raise the
fortifications

of Dara: and signified the day and the hour on which the citizens should
prepare

a bath for his refreshment after the toils of victory. He encountered an
adver­

sary equal to himself, by the new title of general of the east; his superior
in the

science of war, but much inferior in the number and quality of his troops,
which

amounted only to twenty-five thousand Romans and strangers, relaxed in their

(1) A Year—absurd exaggeration! The conquest or Africa may be dated A. D. S33.
September 14: it ia cele­

brated by Justinian in the preface to his Institutes, which were published
November 21, of the same year. In­

cluding the voyage and return, such a computation might he truly applied to
our Indian empire.

(2) Qpturo Si 5 BiMa-etpio; (x rijuuns; n 8p*jewvrs xstt Ix*.upj»w ftirx^v
xsitkj. Procop. Vandal, lib. i. c»

M.) Aleraan. (Not. ad Aneedot. p. J.) an Italian, could easily reject the
German vanity of Giphanius and

Veljeruj, who wished to claim the herot but his Gcrmania, a metropolis of
Thrace, I cannot find in any civil

or ecclesiastical list of the provinces and cities.

,..<3! The two first Persian campaigns of Belisarius, are fairly and copiously
related by his secretary. (Persic

lib. J. c 12—18.)

