106 THE DECLINE AND FALL

ity, an officer of experience proposed a measure, secure by the appearance of

rashness; that the Roman army should cautiously advance along the sea-shore,

while the fleet preceded their march, and successively cast a bridge of boats
over

the mouths of the rivers, the Timavus, the Brenta, the Adige, and the Po, tha
t

fall into the Hadriatic to the north of Ravenna. Nine days he reposed in the
city,

collected the fragments of the Italian army, and marched towards Rimini to
meet

the defiance of an insulting enemy.

The prudence of Narses impelled him to a speedy and decisive action. His

powers were the last effort of the state: the cost of each day accumulated the
enor­

mous account; and the nations, untrained to discipline or fatigue, might be
rashly

provoked to turn their arms against each other, or against their benefactor.
The

same .considerations might have tempered the ardour of Totila. But he was con­

scious, that the clergy and people of Italy aspired to a second revolution: he
felt or

suspected the rapid progress oftreason, and he resolved to risk the Gothic
kingdom

on the chance of a day, in which the valiant would be animated by instant
danger,

and the disaffected might be awed by mutual ignorance. In his march from Ra­

venna, the Roman general chastised the garrison of Rimini, traversed in a
direct

line the hills of Urbino, and re-entered the Flaminian way, nine miles beyond
the

perforated rock, an obstacle of ait and nature which might have stopped or
retard­

ed his progress. (1) The Goths were assembled in the neighbourhood of Rome;

they advanced, without delay, to seek a superior enemy, and the two armies ap­

proached each other at the distance of one hundred furlongs, between Tagina(2)

and the sepulchres of the Gauls. (3) The haughty message of Narses was an of­

fer, not of peace, but of pardon. The answer of the Gothic king declared his
re­

solution to die or conquer. " What day," said the messenger, " will you fix
for

the combat?" "The eighth day," replied Totila: but early the next morning he

attempted to surprise a foe, suspicious of deceit, and prepared for battle.
Ten

thousand Heruli and Lombards, of approved valour and doubtful faith, were
placed

in the centre. Each of the wings was composed of eight thousand Romans; the

right was guarded by the cavalry of the Huns, the left was covered by fifteen
hun­

dred chosen horse, destined, according to the emergencies of action, to
sustain the

retreat of their friends, or to encompass the flank of the enemy. From his
prc-

Ser station at the head of the right wing, the eunuch rode along the line,
expressing

y his voice and countenance the assurance of victory; exciting the soldiers of
the

emperor to punish the guilt and madness of a band of robbers; and exposing to

their view gold chains, collars, and bracelets, the rewards of military
virtue. From

the event of a single combat, they drew an omen of success; and they beheld
with

pleasure the courage of fifty archers, who maintained a small eminence against
three

successive attacks of the Gothic cavalry. At the distance only of two bow-
shots,

the armies spent the morning in dreadful suspense, and the Romans tasted some

necessary food, without unloosening the cuirass from their breast, or the
bridle

from their horses. Narses awaited the charge; and it was delayed by Totila
till

he had received his last succours of two thousand Goths. While he consumed

the hours in fruitless treaty, the king exhibited in a narrow space the
strength and

agility of a warrior. His armour was enchased with gold; his purple banner
float­

ed with the wind; he cast his lance into the air; caught it with the right
hand; shift­

ed it to the left; threw himself backward; recovered his seat; and managed a
fiery

steed in all the paces and evolutions of the equestrian school. As soon as the
suc-

vered with wood*, lakes, and morassei. Man has subdued nature, and the land
has been cultivated, since

the waters are confined and embanked. See the learned researches of Muratori
(Antiquitat. Italia: medii-

A2vi, torn. i. dissert. 21. p. 253,254.) from Vitruvius, Strata, Herodian.old
charters,and local knowledge.

(1) The Flaminian way, as it is corrected from the Itineraries, and the best
modern maps, by dVAnville

(Analyse de I'ltalie, p. 147—162.,) may be thus stated: Rome to Narni, fifty-
one Roman miles: Terni, fifty-

seven, Spoleto, seventy-five; Foligno, eighty-eight; Nocera, one hundred and
three; Cagli, one hundred and

forty-two; Intercisa, one hundred and fiftv-seven; Fossombrone, one hundred
and sixty; Fano, one hundred

and seventy-sis.; Pesaro,one hundred and eighty-four; Rimini, two hundred and
eight—about one hundred and

eighty-nine English miles. He takes no notice of the death of Totila; but
Wesseling (Itinerar. p. 614.) ex­

changes for the field of Taginas the unknown appellation of Ptanint, eight
miles from Nocera.

(2) Taginss, or rather 1 adinse, is mentioned by Pliny; but the bishoprio of
that obscure town, a mile from

Gualdo, in the plain, was united, in the year 1007, with that of Nocera. The
signs of antiquity are preserved

in the local appellations, Fossato, the camp Capraia, Caprea, Bastia, Busta
Gallortun. See Cluverius (Italia

Antiqua, lib. it. e. 6. p. 615—617.,) Lucas Holstenius (Annotat. ad Cluver. p.
85,86.,) Guazzesi (Dissertat. p.

177—217. a professed inquiry) and the maps of the ecclesiastical state and the
march of Ancona, by Le Mai re

and Mae/ini.

(3) The battle was fought in the year of Rome 458: and the consul Decius, by
devoting his own life, as­

sured the triumph of his countrvand his colleague Fabius (T. Liv. 10. 28,29.)
Procopius ascribes to Ca-

millus the victory of the hmta Gallorum; and his error is branded by Cluverius
with the national reproach of

GiKcorum nugamcnta.

