OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

great khan, who passed the Oxus at the head of three or four hundred thousand

Turks. The imprudent Hormouz accepted their perfidious and formidable aid;

the cities of Khorasan or Bactriana were commanded to open their gates; the

march of the barbarians towards the mountains of Hyrcania revealed the corres­

pondence of the Turkish and Roman arms; and their union must have subverted

the throne of the house of Sassan.

, Persia had been lost by a king; it was saved by a hero. After his revolt,
Va-

ranes or Bahrain is stigmatized by the son of Hormouz as an ungrateful slave:
the

proud and ambiguous reproach of despotism, since he was truly descended from

the ancient princes of Rei,(l) one of the seven families whose splendid, as
well as

substantial prerogatives exalted them above the heads of the Persian nobility.
(2)

At the siege of Dara, the valour of Bahram was signalized under the eyes of
Nu-

shirvan, and both the father and son successively prompted him to the command

of armies, the government of Media, and the superinteh'dance of the palace.
The

popular prediction which marked him as the deliverer of Persia, might be in­

spired by his past victories and extraordinary figure: the epithet Giubin is
ex­

pressive of the quality of dry wood; he had the strength and stature of a
giant,

and his savage countenance was fancifully compared to that of a wild cat.
While

the nation trembled, while Hormouz disguised his terror by the name of
suspicion,

and his servants concealed their disloyalty under the mask of fear, Bahram
alone

displayed his undaunted courage and apparent fidelity; and as soon as he found

that no more than twelve thousand soldiers would follow him against the enemy,

he prudently declared, that to this fatal number, Heaven had reserved the ho­

nours of the triumph. The steep and narrow descent of the Pule Rudbar,(3) or

Hyrcanian rock, is the only pass through which an army can penetrate into the

territory of Rei and the plains of Media. From the commanding heights, a band

of resolute men might overwhelm with stones and darts the myriads of the
Turkish

host: their emperor and his son were transpierced with arrows; and the
fugitives

were left, without counsel or provisions, to the revenge of an injured people.
The pa­

triotism of the Persian general was stimulated by his affection for the city
of his fore­

fathers; in the hour of victory every peasant became a soldier, and every
soldier a

hero; and their ardour was kindled by the gorgeous spectacle of beds, and
thrones,

and tables of massy gold, the spoils of Asia, and the luxury of the hostile
camp.

A prince of a less malignant temper could not easily have forgotten his
benefactor,

and the secret hatred of Hormouz was envenomed by a malicious report, thai

Bahram had privately retained the most precious fruits of his Turkish victory.

But the approach of a Roman army on the side of the Araxes compelled the im­

placable tyrant to smile and to applaud; and the toils of Bahram were rewarded

with the permission of encountering a new enemy, by their skill and discipline

more formidable than a Scythian multitude. Elated by his recent success, he

despatched a herald with a bold defiance to the camp of the Romans,
requesting"

them to fix a day of battle, and to choose whether they would pass the river
them­

selves, or allow a free passage to the arms of the great king. The lieutenant
of

the emperor Maurice preferred the safer alternative, and this local circum­

stance, which would have enhanced the victory of the Persians, rendered their
de­

feat more bloody, and their escape more difficult. But the loss of his
subjects,

and the danger of his kingdom, were overbalanced in the mind of Hormouz by

the disgrace of his personal enemy; and no sooner had Bahram collected and re­

viewed his forces, than he received from a royal messenger the insulting gift
of a

distaff, a spinning-wheel, and a complete suit of female apparel. Obedient to
the

speak move amply of the Christian images—I bad almost said idols. This, if I
am not mistaken, is the old­

est (<Kfio*roiitTo; of divine manufacture: but in the next thousand years,
many others issued from the same

workshop.

(1) Ragse,orRei,is mentioned in the apocryphal book of Tobit as already
flourishing, seven hundred years

before Christ, under the Assyrian empire. Under the foreign names of Europus
and Anacia, this city, five

hundred stadia to the south of the Caspian gates, was successively embellished
by the Macedonians ana Par­

thian*. (Strata, lib. zi. p. 706.) Its grandeur and populousness in the ninth
century is exaggerated beyond

the bounds of credibility; but Rei hat been since ruined by wars and the
unwholesomenest of the air. Chap,

din. Voyage en Perse, torn.i. p. 270.280. IVHerbelot, Biblioth. Oriental, p.
714.

(2) Theophylact, lib. iii. c. 13. The story of the seven Persians is told In
the third book of Herodotus; and

their noble descendants are often mentioned, especially in the fragments of
Ctesias. Yet the independence of

Otanes (Herodot. lib. iii. c. 83,840 is hostile to the spirit of despotism,
and it may not seem probable that the-

seven families could survive the revolutions or eleven hundred years. They
might, however, be represented

by the seven ministers; (Brizzon, de Regno Persico, lib. i. p. 190.) and some
Persian nobles, like the kings of"

Pontui (Polyb. lib. v. p. 540,) and Cappadocia, (Diodor. Sicul. lib. 31. torn.
ii. p. 517.) might claim their descent

from the bold companions of Darius.

(3) See an accurate description of this mountain by Olearius. (Voyage en
Perse, p. 997,998.) who ascvn}.

ed it with much difficulty and danger in his return from Ispahan to the
Caspian tea.

