OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

or intelligence in their celestial hierarchy; and in the Magian system the
conflict

tot the two principles betrays the imperfection of the conqueror. The
Christians

of the seventh century had insensibly relapsed into a semblance of paganism;
their

public and private vows were addressed to the relics and images that disgraced

the temples of the east: the throne of the Almighty was darkened by a cloud of

martyrs, and saints, and angels, the objects of popular veneration; and the
Col-

lyridian heretics who flourished in the fruitful soil of Arabia, invested the
Virgin

Mary with the name and honours of a goddess. (1) The mysteries of the Trinity

and incarnation afifiear to contradict the principle of the divine unity. In
their

obvious sense, they introduce three equal deities, and transform the man Jesus
into

the substance of the son of God:(2) an orthodox commentary will satisfy only a

believing mind: intemperate curiosity and zeal had torn the veil of the
sanctuary;

and each of the oriental sects was eager to confess that all, except
themselves,

deserved the reproach of idolatry and polytheism. The creed of Mahomet is

free from suspicion or ambiguity; and the Koran is a glorious testimony to the

unity of God. The prophet of Mecca rejected the worship of idols and men, of

stars and planets, on the rational principle that whatever rises must set,
that what­

ever is born must die, that whatever is corruptible must decay and perish. (3)
In

the author of the universe, his rational enthusiasm confessed and adored an
infinite

and eternal being, without form or place, without issue or similitude, present
to

our most secret thoughts, existing by the necessity of its own nature, and
deriving

from himself all moral and intellectual perfection. These sublime truths, thus
an­

nounced in the language of the prophet,(4) are firmly held by his disciples,
and

defined with metaphysical precision by the interpreters of the Koran. A
philoso­

phic theist might subscribe the popular creed of the Mahometans:(5) a creed
too

sublime perhaps for our present faculties. What object remains for the fancy,
or

even the understanding, when we have abstracted from the unknown substance all

ideas of time and space, of motion and matter, of sensation and reflection?
The

first principle of reason and revelation was confirmed by the voice of
Mahomet: his

proselytes, from India to Morocco, are distinguished by the name of
Unitarians;

and the danger of idolatry has been prevented by the interdiction of images.
The

doctrine of eternal decrees and absolute predestination is strictly embraced
by the

Mahometans; and thev struggle with the common difficulties, how to reconcile
the

prescience of God with the freedom and responsibility of man; how to explain
the

permission of evil under the reign of infinite power and infinite goodness.

The God of nature has written his existence on all his works, and his law in
the

heart of man. To restore the knowledge of the one and the practice of the

other, has been the real or pretended aim of the prophets of every age; the
libe­

rality of Mahomet allowed to his predecessors the same credit which he claimed

for himself; and the chain of inspiration was prolonged from the fall of Adam
to

the promulgation of the Koran. (6) During that period, some rays of prophetic

light had been imparted to one hundred and twenty-four thousand of the elect,

discriminated by their respective measures of virtue and grace; three hundred

and thirteen apostles were sent with a special commission to recall their
country

from idolatry and vice; one hundred and four volumes had been dictated by the

holy spirit; and six legislators of transcendent brightness have announced to
man­

kind the six successive revelations of various rites, but of one immutable
religion.

(1) Hottinger, Hist. Orient, p. 225—228. The Collyridian heresy was carried
from Thraee to Arabia hy some

women, and the name was borrowed from the *oK*.vft; or cake, which they
offered to the goddess. This ex­

ample, that of Beryllus bishop of Bostra, (Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. vi. c.
33.) and several others, may excuse

the reproach, Arabia haeresem ferax.

(2) The three gods in the Koran (e. 4. p. 81. c. 5. p. 92.) are obviously
directed against our catholic mystery;

but the Arabic commentators understand them of the Father, the Son, and the
Virgin Mary, an heretical tri­

nity, maintained, as it is said, hy some barbarians at the council of Nice.
(Eutych. Anna), torn. i. p. 440.) But

the existence of the MarianifesU denied by the candid Beausobre; (Hist, de
Manicheisme, torn. i. p. 532.) and

he derives the mistake from the word Rouah, the Holy Ghost, which in some
oriental tongues is of the feminine

gender, and is figuratively styled the mother of Christ in the Gospel of the
Nazarenes.

(3) This train of thought is philosophically exemplified in the character of
Abraham, who opposed in Chal-

dea the first introduction of idolatry. (Koran, c. 6. p. 106. d'Hei'bclot,
Bibli.it. Orient, p. 13.)

(4) See the Koran, particularly the second, (p. 30.) the fifty-seventh, (p.
437.) the fif ty-eighth,(p. 441.) chap­

ter, which proclaim the omnipotence of the Creator.

(5) The most orthodox creeds are translated by Pocock. (Specimpn, p. 274.
284—292.) Ockley. (Hist, of the

Saracens, vol. ii. p. 82—95.) Heland, (de Religion. Moham. lib. i. p. 7—13.)
and Chardin (Voyages en

•Perse, torn, i. p. 4—28.) The great truth that God is without similitude, is
foolishly criticised by Maracci, (Al­

coran, torn. i. part iit. p. 87—94.) because he made man after his own image.

(6) Reland, de Relig. Moham. lib. i. p. 17—47. (Sale's Preliminary Discourse,
p. 73—76.) Voyage de Chardin,

torn. iv. p. 28-37. and 37—47. for the Persian addition, " Ali is the vicar of
God!" Yet the precise number of

prophets is not an article of faith.

