OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. iu9

dismissed in safety; and their grateful zeal at length subdued the obstinacy
of their

countrymen.(l)

Before Lucca had surrendered, Italy was overwhelmed by a new deluge of bar­

barians. A feeble youth, the grandson of Clovis, reigned over the Austrasians
or

oriental Franks. The guardians of Theodebald entertained with coldness and re­

luctance the magnificent promises of the Gothic ambassadors. But the spirit of

a martial people outstripped the timid counsels of the court: two brothers,
Lo-

thaire and Buccelin,(2) the dukes of the Alemanni, stood forth as the leaders
of

the Italian war; and seventy-five thousand Germans descended in the autumn

from the Rhsetian Alps into the plain of Milan. The vanguard of the Roman

army was stationed near the Po, under the conduct of Fulcaris, a bold
Herulian,

who rashly conceived, that personal bravery was the sole duty and merit of a
com­

mander. As he marched without order or precaution along the jf.milian way, an

ambuscade of Franks suddenly arose from the amphitheatre of Parma: his troops

were surprised and routed; but their leader refused to fly, declaring to the
last

moment that death was less terrible than the angry countenance of Narses. The

death of Fulcaris, and the retreat of the surviving chiefs, decided the
fluctuating

and rebellious temper of the Goths; they flew to the standard of their
deliverers,

and admitted them into the cities which still resisted the arms of the Roman
ge­

neral. The conqueror of Italy opened a free passage to the irresistible
torrent of

barbarians. They passed under the walls of Cesena, and answered by threats

and reproaches the advice of Aligern, that the Gothic treasures could no
longer

repay the labour of an invasion. Two thousand Franks were destroyed by the

skill and valour of Narses himself, who sallied from Rimini at the head of
three

hundred horse, to chastise the licentious rapine of their march. On the
confines

of Samnium, the two brothers divided their forces. With the right wing, Buc­

celin assumed the spoil of Campania, Lucania, and Bruttium: with the left, Lo-

thaire accepted the plunder of Apulia and Calabria. They followed the coast

of the Mediterranean and the Hadriatic, as far as Rhegium and Otranto, and the

extreme lands of Italy were the term of their destructive progress. The
Franks,

who were Christians and catholics, contented themselves with pillage and occa­

sional murder. But the churches, which their piety had spared, were stripped

by the sacrilegious hands of the Alemanni, who sacrificed horses' heads to
their

native deities of the woods and rivers;(3) they melted or profaned the
consecrated

vessels, and the ruins pi shrines and altars were stained with the blood of
the

faithful. Buccelin was actuated by ambition; and Lothaire by avarice- The

former aspired to restore the Gothic kingdom; the latter, after a promise to

his brother of speedy succours, returned by the same road to deposite his
trea­

sure beyond the Alps. The strength of their army was already wasted by the

change of climate and contagion of disease: the Germans revelled in the
vintage

of Italy; and their own intemperance avenged, in some degree, the miseries of
a

defenceless people.

At the entrance of the spring, the imperial troops, who had guarded the
cities,

assembled to the number of eighteen thousand men, in the neighbourhood of

Rome. Their winter hours had not been consumed in idleness. By the command,

and after the example of Narses, they repeated each day their military
exercise

on foot, and on horse-back, accustomed their ear to obey the sound of the
trumpet,

and practised the steps and evolutions of the Pyrrhic dance. From the straits
of

Sicily, Buccelin, with thirty thousand Franks and Alemanni, slowly moved to­

wards Capua, occupied with a wooden tower the bridge of Casilinum, covered his

right by the stream of the Vulturnus, and secured the rest of his encampment,

by a rampart of sharp stakes, and a circle of wagons, whose wheels were buried

in the earth. He impatiently expected the return of Lothaire; ignorant, alasl

that his brother could never return, and that the chief and his army had been

swept away by a strange disease(4) on the banks of the lake Benacus, between

(1) There inome difficulty in connecting the thirtj-fifth chapter of the
fourth book of the Gothic war of

Froeopius with the tint book of the history of Agathias. We must now
relinquish a statesman and soldier, to

attend the footsteps of a poet and rhetorician (lib. i. p. 11. lib. ii. p. 51.
edit. Louvre.)

(2) Among the fabulous exploits of Buccelin, he discomfited and slew
Belisarius, subdued Italy and Sicily,

&c. See; in the historians of France, Gregory of Tours (torn. ii. lib. iii. c.
32. p. 203.) and Almoin, (torn. hi..

lib. 2. de Gestis Francorum, c. xxiii. p. 59.)

(3) Agathias notices their superstition in a philosophic tone (lib. i. p. 18.)
At Zug, in Switzerland, idola­

try still prevailed in the year 613i St. Cotumban and St. Gall, were the
apostles of that rude country; and the

latter founded a hermitage, which has swelled into an ecclesiastical
principality, and a populous city, the seat

oT freedom and commerce.

(4) See. the death of Lothaire in Agathias (lib. ii. p. 38,,) and Paul
Warnefrid, surnamed Diacontti (lib. ii. p.,

3.775.) The Greek makes him rave'and tear his floli. He had plundered
churches.

