216 THE DECLINE AND FALL

' The disorders of thirty years at length produced the famous Henoticon(1)

of the emperor Zeno, which in his reign, and in that of Anastasius, was signed
by

all the bishops of the east, under the penalty of degradation and exile, if
they

rejected or infringed this salutary and fundamental law. The clergy may smile

or groan at the presumption of a layman who defines the articles of faith: yet
if he

stoops to the humiliating task, his mind is less infected by prejudice or
interest,

and the authority of the magistrate can only be maintained by the concord of
the

people. It is in ecclesiastical story, that Zeno appears less contemptible;
and I

am not able to discern any Manichsan or Eutychian guilt in the generous saying

of Anastasius, that it was unworthy of an emperor to persecute the worshippers

of Christ and the citizens of Rome. The Henoticon was most pleasing to the

Egyptians; yet the smallest blemish has not been described by the jealous and
even

the jaundiced eyes of our orthodox schoolmen, and it accurately represents the
ca­

tholic faith of the incarnation, without adopting or disclaiming the peculiar
terms or

tenets of the hostile sects. A solemn anathema is pronounced against Nestorius

and Eutyches; against all heretics by whom Christ is divided, or confounded,
or

reduced to a phantom. Without defining the number or the article of the word

nature, the pure system of St. Cyril, the faith of Nice, Constantinople, and
Ephe-

sus, is respectfully confirmed; but, instead of bowing at the name of the
fourth

council, the subject is dismissed by the censure of all contrary doctrines, if
any

such have been taught either elsewhere or at Chalcedon, Under this ambiguous

expression, the friends and enemies of the last synod might unite in a silent
em­

brace. The most reasonable Christians acquiesced in this mode of toleration;
but

their reason was feeble and inconstant, and their obedience was despised as
timid

and servile by the vehement spirit of their brethren. On a subject which en­

grossed the thoughts and discourses of men, it was difficult to preserve an
exact

neutrality; a book, a sermon, a prayer, rekindled the flame of controversy;
and

the bonds of communion were alternately broken and renewed by the private ani­

mosity of the bishops. The space between Nestorius and Eutyches was filled by

" a thousand shades of language and opinion; the acefihali(2) of Egypt, and
the Ro­

man pontiffs, of equal valour, though of unequal strength, may be found at two

extremities of the theological scale. The acephali, without a king or a
bishop, were .

separated above three hundred years from the patriarchs of Alexandria, who had

accepted the communion of Constantinople, without exacting a formal condemna­

tion of the synod of Chalcedon. For accepting the communion of Alexandria,
with­

out a formal approbation of the same synod, the patriarchs of Constantinople
were

anathematized by the popes. Their inflexible despotism involved the most
ortho­

dox of the Greek churches in this spiritual contagion, denied or doubted the
vali­

dity of their sacraments,(3) and fomented, thirty-five years, the schism of
the east

and west, till they finally abolished the memory of four Byzantine pontiffs,

who had dared to oppose the supremacy of St. Peter. (4) Before that period,
the

precarious truce of Constantinople and Egypt had been violated by the zeal of
the

rival prelates. Macedonius, who was suspected of the Nestorian heresy,
asserted

in disgrace and exile, the synod of Chalcedon, while the successor of Cyril
would

have purchased its overthrow with a bribe of two thousand pounds of gold.

In the fever of the times, the sense, or rather the sound of a syllable, was
suffi­

cient to disturb the peace of an empire. The Trisagion(5) (thrice holy,) Hoh/t

(1) The Henuticon is transcribed by Evagrius (lib. iii, c. 13.,) and
translated by Liberatus (Brev. c. xviii.J

Pagi (Critical ton. ii. p. 414.0 and Asseman. (Bibliot. Orient, torn. i. p.
343.) are satisfied that h is free From he­

resy; but Petavius (Dogmat. Theolog. torn. r. lib. i. c. 13. p. 40.) most
unaccountably affirms Chalcedonensem

ascivit. An adversary would prove that he had never read the Henoticon.

(2) See Renaudot (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 113. 131. 145. 195-247.) They were
reconciled by the care of

Mark I. (A. D. 799—819.,) he promoted their chiefs to the bishopries of
Athribis and Talba, (perhaps Tava; see

d'Anville, p. 82.) and supplied the sacraments, which had failed for want of
an episcopal ordination.

(3) De his cjuos baptizavit quos ordinavit Acacius, majorum traditione
confectam et veram prsecipue rehgi.

osse solicitudini coneruam prsebemus sine difficuttate niedicinam. (Galasius,
in epist. l. ad Euphemium. Con-

cil. torn. v. 286.) The offer of a medicine proves the disease, and numbers
must have perished before the ar­

rival of the Roman physician. Tillemont himself (Mem. Eccles. torn. xvi. p.
372.042, &c.) is shocked at the

proud and uncharitable temper of the popes; they are now glad, says he, to
invoke St. Flavian of Antioch.

St. Elias of Jerusalem, fee. to whom they refused communion whilst upon earth.
But cardinal Baronius is

firm and hard as the rock of St Peter.

(4) Their names were erased from the diptych of the church: ex venerabili
diptycho, in qno piae memoriss

transitum ad ccelum habentium episcoporum vocabula conlinemur. (Concil. torn.
iv. p. 1846.) This ecclesi­

astical record was therefore equivalent to the book of life.

(5) Petavius (Dogmat. Theolog. torn. v. lib. v. c. 2-4. p. 217—225.) and
Tillemont (Mem. Eccles. torn. ri».

p. 713, Sec. 799.) represents the history and doctrine of the Trisagion. In
the twelve centuries between Isaiah

and St. Proclus's boy, who was taken up into heaven before the bishop and
peopleof Constantinople, the sane;

was considerably improved. ThebjryhfairitTiean;;elssing".Hol)'Gad! Holy
Strong! Holy Immortal!"

