128 THE DECLINE AND FALL

lessons of his teachers; the judges were enjoined to obey the comment as well
as

the text of the law; and the use of codicils was a memorable innovation, which

Augustus, ratified by the advice of the civilians.(l)

The most absolute mandate could only require that the judges should agree with

the civilians, if the civilians agreed among themselves. But positive
institutions

are often the result of custom and prejudice; laws and language are ambiguous

and arbitrary; where reason is incapable of pronouncing, the love of argument
is

inflamed by the envy of rivals, the vanity of masters, the blind attachment of

their disciples: and the Roman jurisprudence was divided by the once famous
sects

of the Proculians and Sabinians.{2) Two sages of the law, Ateius Capito and
An-

tistius Labeo,(3) adorned the peace of the Augustan age: the former
distinguished

by the favour of the sovereign; the latter more illustrious by his contempt of
that

■ favour, and his stern though harmless opposition to the tyrant of Rome.
Their

legal studies were influenced by the various colours of their temper and
princi­

ples. Labeo was attached to the form of the old republic; his rival embraced
the

more profitable substance of the rising monarchy. But the disposition of a
cour­

tier is tame and submissive; and Capito seldom presumed to deviate from the
sen­

timents, or at least from the words, of his predecessors: while the bold
republican

pursued his independent ideas without fear of paradox or innovations. The
free­

dom of Labeo was enslaved, however, by the rigour of his own conclusions, and

he decided according to the letter of the law, the same questions which his
indul­

gent competitor resolved with a latitude of equity more suitable to the common

sense and feelings of mankind. If a fair exchange had been substituted to the

payment of money, Capito still considered the transaction as a legal sale;(4)
and

he consulted nature for the age of puberty, without confining his definition
to the

precise period of twelve or fourteen years.(5) This opposition of sentiments
was

propagated in the writings and lessons of the two founders; the schools of
Capito

and Labeo maintained their inveterate conflict from the age of Augustus to
that

of Hadrian ;(6) and the two sects derived their appellations from Sabinus and
Pro-

culus, their most celebrated teachers. The names of Cassians and Pegasians

were likewise applied to the same parties; but, by a strange reverse, the
popular

cause was in the hands of Pegasus, (7) a timid slave of Domitian, while the
fa­

vourite of the Cxsars was represented by Cassius,(8) who gloried in his
descent

from the patriot assassin. By the perpetual edict, the controversies of the
sects

were in a great measure determined. For that important work, the emperor

Hadrian preferred the chief of the Sabinians; the friends of monarchy
prevailed;

but the moderation of Salvius Julian insensibly reconciled the victors and the
van­

quished. Like the cotemporary philosophers, the lawyers of the age of the An-

tonines disclaimed the authority of a master, and adopted from every system
the

most probable doctrines. (9) But their writings would have been less
voluminous,

plexed by the number and weight of discordant testimonies, and every sentence

that his passion or interest might pronounce, was justified by the sanction of
some

(1) See Pomponius (de Origine Juris Pandect, lib. i. tit. ii. leg. it. No. 470
Heineccius (ad Institnt. lib. i. tit.

ii. No. 8. lib. ii. tit. \xv. in Element, et Antiquitat.,) and Gravina (p.
41—15.) Tet the monopoly of Augustus,

a harsh meaiure, would appear with some softening in the cotemporary evidence;
and it was probably veiled

by a decree of the senate.

(2) I have perused the diatribe of Gotfridas Mascovius, the learned Maseou.de
Sectis Jurisconsattorura (Lip-

siae, 1728, in 12mo. p. 276..) a learned treatise on a narrow and barren
ground.

(3) See the character of Antistius Labeo in Tacitus (Annat. 3. 75. J and in an
epistle of Ateius Capiro(Aul.

Gelliui, 13.12..) who accuses his rival of libertas nimia et vecors. Yet
Horace would not have lashed a virtu­

ous and respectable senator; and I must adopt the emendatiun of Bentley, who
reads Labieno insanior (Serm.

lib. iii. 82.) See Mascou, de Seeds, (o. i. p. 1—24.)

(4) Justinian (Institut. lib. iii. tit. xxiii. and Theophil. Vers. Grsec. p.
677. 680.) has commemorated this

weighty dispute,and the verses of Homer that were alleged on either side as
legal authorities. It was decided

by Paul (leg. xxsiii. ad Edict, in Pandect, lib. xviii. tit. i. leg. i.,)
since, in a simple exchange, the buyer could

Sot be discriminated from the seller.

(5) This controversy was likewise given for the Proculians to supersede the
indecency of a search, and to

comply with the aphorism of Hippocrates, who was attached to the septenary
number of two weeks of yean,

or seven hundred of days (Institut. lib. i. tit. xxii.) Plutarch and the
stoies (de Placit. Pbitosoph. lib. v. c. 24.)

assign a more natural reason. Fourteen years is the age—jrspi ry o
(rffsppaToeo; xpwrxt oppo;. See the vestigia of

the sects in Mascou* e. ix. p. 145—276.

(6) The series and conclusions of the sects are described by Mascou (e. 2—7.
p. 24—120.) and it wonHI be al­

most ridiculous to praise his equal justice to these obsolete sects.

(7) At the first summons he flies to the turbot council; vet Juvenal (Sar. iv.
75—81.) styles the prefect or bai-

liffof Rome tanetissimus legum interpret. From his science, says the old
scholiast, he was called, not a roan,

but a book. He derived the singular name of Pegasus from the galley which bis
father commanded.

(8) Tacit, Annul. 17.7. Sticton. iu JJerone, e. xxxvii.

(9) Mascou. de Seetis, (c. viii. p. 120—144.) de Heriscundis, a legal terra
which was applied to these etfectio

lawyers: hcrciscereis synonymous to divider*.

