JtjO THE DECLINE AND FALL

rights of a citiaen. In the general consternation, the Caesar John asserted
the in­

defeasible right of his three nephews: Constantinople listened to his voice;
and the

Turkish captive was proclaimed in the capital, and received on the frontier,
as an

enemy of the republic. Romanus was not more fortunate in domestic than in fo­

reign war: the loss of two battles compelled him to yield, on the assurance of
fair

and honourable treatment; but his enemies were devoid of faith or humanity;
and,

after the cruel extinction of his sight, his wounds were left to bleed and
corrupt,

till in a few days.he was relieved from a state of misery. Under the triple
reign

of the house of Ducas, the two younger brothers were reduced to the vain
honours

of the purple; but the eldest, the pusillanimous Michael, was incapable of
sustain­

ing the Roman sceptre; and his surname of Sdrafiinaces denotes the reproach

which he shared with an avaricious favourite, who enhanced the price, and di­

minished the measure of wheat. In the school of Pselhis, and after the example

of his mother: the son of Eudocia made some proficiency in philosophy and
rheto­

ric; but his character was degraded, rather than ennobled, by the virtues of a

monk, and the learning o'f a sophist. Strong in the contempt of their
sovereign

and their own esteem, two generals at the head of the European and Asiatic le­

gions assumed the purple at Adrianople and Nice. Their revolt was in the same

month; they bore the same name of Nicephorus; but the two candidates were dis­

tinguished by the surnames of Bryennius and Botaniates; the former in the
matu­

rity of wisdom and courage, 'the latter conspicuous only by the memory of his
past

exploits. While Botaniates advanced with cautious and dilatory steps, his
active

competitor stood in arms before the gates of Constantinople. The name of Bry­

ennius was illustrious; his cause was popular; but his licentious troops could
not be

restrained from burning and pillaging a suburb; and the people, who would have

hailed the rebel, rejected and repulsed the incendiary of his country. This
change

of the public opinion was favourable to Botaniates, who at length, with an
army of

Turks, approached the shores of Chalcedon. A formal invitation, in the name of

the patriarch, the synod, and the senate, was circulated through the streets
of

Constantinople; and the general assembly, in the dome of St. Sophia, debated
with

order and calmness, on the choice of their sovereign. The guards of Michael

would have dispersed this unarmed multitude; but the feeble emperor,
applauding

his own moderation and clemency, resigned the ensigns of royalty, and was re­

warded with a monastic habit, and the title of archbishop of Ephesus. He left
a

son, a Constantine, born and educated in the purple; and a daughter of the
house

of Ducas illustrated the blood, and confirmed the succession of the Comnenian

dynasty.

John Comnerius, the brother of the emperor Isaac, survived in peace and dig­

nity his generous refusal of the sceptre. By his wife Anne, a woman of
masculine

spirit and policy, he left eight children; the three daughters multiplied the
Com­

nenian alliances with the noblest of the Greeks; of the five sons, Manuel was

stopped by a premature death; Isaac and Alexius restored the imperial
greatness

of their house, which was enjoyed without toil or danger by the two younger
bre­

thren, Adrian and Nicephorus. Alexius, the third and most illustrious of the

brothers, was endowed by nature with the choicest gifts both of mind and body:

they were cultivated by a liberal education, and exercised in the school of
obedi­

ence and adversity. The youth was dismissed from the perils of the Turkish

war, by the paternal care of the emperor Romanus; but the mother of the Com-

peni, with her aspiring race, was accused of treason, and banished by the sons
of

Ducas, to an island in the Propontis. The two brothers soon emerged into
favour

and action, fought by each other's side against the rebels and barbarians, and
ad­

hered to the emperor Michael, till he was deserted by the world and by
himself.

In his first interview with Botaniates, " Prince (said Alexius, with a noble
frank­

ness,) my duty rendered me your-enemy; the decrees of God and of the people

have made me your subject. Judge of my future loyalty by my past opposition."

The successor of Michael entertained him with esteem and confidence: his
valour

was employed against three rebels, who disturbed the peace of the emperor, or
at

least of the emperors, Ursel, Bryennius, and Basilacius, were formidable by
their

numerous forces and military fame: they were successively vanquished in the
field,

and led in chains to the foot of the throne; and whatever treatment they might
re­

ceive from a timid and cruel court, they applauded the clemency, as well as
the

courage of the conqueror. But the loyalty of the Comneni was soon tainted by

fear and suspicion; nor is it easy to settle between a subject and a despot,
the debt

of gratitude, which tne former is tempted to claim by a revolt, and the latter
to

