THE DECLINE AND FALL

CHAPTER LI.

The conquest of Persia, Syria, Egypt, Africa, and Spain, by the Arabs or
Saracens.—-

Empire of the caliphs, or successors of Mahomet—State of the Christians, Sic.
under

their government.

The revolution of Arabia had not changed the character of the Arabs; the death

of Mahomet was the signal of independence; and the hasty structure of his_
power

and religion tottered to its foundations. A small and faithful band of his
primitive

disciples had listened to his eloquence, and shared his distress; had fled
with the

apostle from the persecution of Mecca, or had received the fugitive in the
walls of

Medina. The increasing myriads, who acknowledged Mahomet as their king and

prophet, had been compelled by his arms, or allured by his prosperity. The po-

lytheists were confounded by the simple idea of a solitary and invisible God:
the

pride of the Christians and Jews disdained the yoke of a mortal and
cotemporary

legislator. Their habits of faith and obedience were not sufficiently
confirmed;

and many of the new converts regretted the venerable antiquity of the law of
Mo­

ses, or the rites and mysteries of the catholic church, or the idols, the
sacrifices,

the joyous festivals, of their pagan ancestors. The jarring interests and
heredi­

tary feuds of the Arabian tribes had not yet coalesced in a system of union
and

subordination; and the barbarians were impatient of the mildest and most
salutary

laws that curbed their passions, or violated their customs. They submitted
with

reluctance to the religious precepts of the Koran, the abstinence from wine,
the

fast of the Ramadan, and the daily repetition of five prayers; and the alms
and

tithes, which were collected for the treasury of Medina, could be
distinguished

only by a name from the payment of a perpetual and ignominious tribute. The

example of Mahomet had excited a spirit of fanaticism or imposture, and
several

of his rivals presumed to imitate the conduct, and defy the authority, of the
living

prophet. At the head of the fugitives and auxiliaries, the first caliph was
reduced

to the cities of Mecca, Medina, and Tayef; and perhaps the Koreish would have

restored the idols of the Caaba, if their levity had not been checked by a
seasona­

ble reproof. " Ye men of Mecca, will ye be the last to embrace, and the first
to

abandon the religion of Islam ?" After exhorting the Moslems to confide in the
aid

of God and his apostle, Abubeker resolved, by a vigorous attack, to prevent
the

junction of the rebels. The women and children were safely lodged in the cavi­

ties of the mountains: the warriors marching under eleven banners, diffused
the

terror of their arms; and the appearance of military force revived and
confirmed

the loyalty of the faithful. The inconstant tribes accepted, with humble
repent­

ance, the duties of prayer, and fasting, and alms; and, after some examples of

success and severity, the most daring apostates fell prostrate before the
sword of

the Lord and of Caled. In the fertile province of Yamanah.(l) between the Red

Sea and the gulf of Persia, in a city not inferior to Medina itself, a
powerful chief,

his name was Moseilama, had assumed the character of a prophet, and the tribe

of Hanifa listened to his voice. A female prophetess was attracted by his
reputa­

tion: the decencies of words and actions were spurned by these favourites of
hea-

ven;(2) and they employed several days in mystic and amorous converse. An ob-

fblio pages, the lire of Mahomet and the annals of the caliphs. They en joved
the advantage of reading, and

sometimes correcting, the Arabic text; yet notwithstanding their high-
snu'ntfing boasts, I cannot find, after the

conclusion of my work, that they have afforded me much (if any) additional
information. The dull mass is not

quickened bya spark of philosophy or taste; and the compilers indulge the
criticism of acrimonions bigotry

against Boulainvilliers, Sale, Gagmer, and all who even treated Mahomet with
favour, or even justice.

(0 See the description of the city and country of Al Yamanah. in Abulfeda,
Descript. Arabise,p.60,6I. In

the thirteenth century, there were some ruins, and a few palms: but in the
present century, the same ground

is occupied by the visions and arms of a modern prophet, whose tenets are
imperfectly known. (Neibuhr, De­

scription de rArabie, p. 396—302.)

(2) Their first salutation may be transcribed, but cannot be translated. It
was thus that Moseilama said or

sung:— .

Surge tandem itaque strenue permolendfl; nam stratus tibi thorns eat.

. Ant tnpronatulo tentorio si velis, aut in abditiore cubieulo si malis;

Aut suspinam te humi exporrcetam fustigabo, si velis, aut si malis manibus
pedibusque nixam.

Ant si veins ejus (Priafii) gemino triente, aut si malis totus veniam.

Into, totus venito, O Apostole Dei clamabat foemina. Id ipsum dicebat.

Mosr-ilama mihi qunque suggessit Deus.

The prophetess Segjab, after the fall of her lover, returned to idolatry; but,
under the reign of Moawiyab.

*"e oecame a Mussulman, and died at Bassora. (Abnlfcda, Anna), vers. Reiske, p. 63.)

