OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 321

According to the tradition of the nocturnal journey, the apostle, in his
personal

conference with the Deity, was commanded to impose on his disciples the daily

obligation of fifty prayers. By the advice of Moses, he applied for an
alleviation

of this intolerable burden; the number was gradually reduced to five; without
any

dispensation of business or pleasure, or time or place, the devotion of the
faithful

is repeated at day-break, at noon, in the afternoon, in the evening, and at
the first

watch of the night; and, in the present decay of religious fervour, our
travellers

are edified by the profound humility and attention of the Turks and Persians.

Cleanliness is the key of prayer: the frequent lustration of the hands, the
face,

and the body, which was practised of old by the Arabs, is solemnly enjoined by

the Koran; and a permission is formally granted to supply with sand the
scarcity

of water. The words and attitudes of supplication, as it is performed either
sit­

ting, or standing, or prostrate on the ground, are prescribed by custom or
authority,

but the prayer is poured forth in short and fervent ejaculations; the measure
of

zeal is not exhausted by a tedious liturgy; and each Mussulman, for his own
per­

son, is invested with the character of a priest. Amongst the theists, who
reject

the use of images, it has been found necessary to restrain the wanderings of
the

fancy, by directing the eye and the thought towards a kcbla, or visible point
of the

horizon. The prophet was at first inclined to gratify the Jews by the choice
of

Jerusalem; but he soon returned to a more natural partiality; and five times
every

day the eyes of the nations of Astracan, at Fez, at Delhi, are devoutly turned
to

the holy temple of Mecca. Yet every spot for the service of God is equally
pure;

the Mahometans indifferently pray in their chamber, or in the street. As a
dis­

tinction from the Jews and Christians, the Friday in each week is set apart
for the

useful institution of public worship: the people are assembled in the mosch;
and the

iman, some respectable elder, ascends the pulpit, to begin the prayer, and
pro­

nounce the sermon. But the Mahometan religion is destitute of priesthood or

sacrifice; and the independent spirit of fanaticism looks down with contempt
on

the ministers and the slaves of superstition. II. The voluntary(l) penance of
the

ascetics, the torment and glory of their lives, was odious to a prophet who
cen­

sured in his companions a rash vow of abstaining from flesh, and women, and
sleep;

and firmly declared that he would sutler no monks in his religion.(2) Yet he
in­

stituted, in each year, a fast of thirty days: and strenuously recommended the
ob­

servance, as a discipline which purifies the soul and subdues the body, as a
salu­

tary exercise of obedience to the will of God and his apostle. During the
month

of Ramadan, from the rising to the setting of the sun, the Mussulman abstains

from eating, and drinking, and women, and baths, and perfumes; from all
nourish^

ment that can restore his strength, from all pleasure that can gratify his
senses.

In the revolution of the lunar year, the Ramadan coincides by turns with the

winter cold, and the summer heat; and the patient martyr, without assuaging
his

thirst with a drop of water, must expect the close of a tedious and sultry
day. The

interdiction of wine, peculiar to some orders of priests or hermits, is
converted by

Mahomet alone into a positive and general law:(3) and a considerable portion
of

the globe has abjured, at his command, the use of that salutary, though
dangerous

liquor. These painful restraints are, doubtless, infringed by the libertine,
and

eluded by the hypocrite: but the legislator, by whom they are enacted, cannot

surely be accused of alluring his proselytes by the indulgence of their
sensual ap­

petites. III. The charity of the Mahometans descends to the animal creation;

and the Koran repeatedly inculcates, not as a merit, but as a strict and
indispen­

sable duty, the relief of the indigent and unfortunate. Mahomet, perhaps, is
the

only lawgiver who has defined the precise measure of charity: the standard may

vary with the degree and nature of property, as it consists either in money,
in corn

or cattle, in fruits or merchandise: but the Mussulman does not accomplish the

Tournefort (Voyage du Levant, torn. ii. p. 325—360, in octavo) describes what
he had seen or the religion of

the Turks.

(1) Mahomet (Sale's Koran, c. ix. p. 157.) reproaches the Christians with
taking their priests and monks for

their lords, besides God. Yet Maracci (Prodromus. part iii. p. 69, 70.)
excuses the worship, especially of the

pope, and quotes, from the Koran itself, the case of Eblis, or Satan, who was
cast from heaven for refusing to

adore Adam.

(2) Koran, e. v. p. 94 and Sale's note, which refers to the authority of
Jallalodilin and Al Beidawi. D'Herhe-

lot declares, that Mahomet condemned la vie rcligietise, and that the first
swarms of fakirs, dermises, Sec. did not

appear till after the year 300 of the Hecira (Riblioih. Orient, p. 292—718.)

(3) See the double prohibition (Koran, e. ii. p. 25. c. v. p. 94.:) the One in
the style of a legislator, the other

in that of a fanatic. The public aird private motives of Mahomet are
investigated by Prideaux (Life of Maho­

met, p. 62—64.) and Sale (Preliminary Discourse, p. 124.)

Vol. III. . 41

