OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 263

tes and the Tigris, the dominion of Syria, and the conquest of Jerusalam, the
thread

of his life and of the public felicity was broken by a singular accident. He
hunted

the wild boar in the valley of Anazarbus, and had fixed his javelin in the
body

of the furious animal: but, in the struggle, a poisoned arrow dropped from his

quiver, and a slight wound in his hand, which produced a mortification, was
fatal

to the best and greatest of the Comnenian princes.

A premature death had swept away the two eldest sons of John the Handsome;

of the two survivors, Isaac and Manuel, his judgment or affection preferred
the

younger; and the choice of the dying prince was ratified by the soldiers who
had

applauded the valour of the favourite in his Turkish war. The faithful Axuch

hastened to the capital, secured the person of Isaac in honourable
confinement,

and purchased with a gift of two hundred pounds of silver, the leading
ecclesiastics

of St. Sophia, who possessed a decisive voice in the consecration of an
emperor.

With his veteran and affectionate troops, Manuel soon visited Constantinople;
his

brother acquiesced in the title of Sebastocrator; his subjects admired the
lofty

stature and martial graces of their new sovereign, and listened with credulity
to

the flattering promise, that he blended the wisdom of age with the activity
and

vigour of youth. By the experience of his government, they were taught, that
he

emulated the spirit, and shared the talents of his father, whose social
virtues were

buried in the grave. A reign of thirty-seven years is filled by a perpetual
though

various warfare against the Turks, the Christians, and the hordes of the
wilder­

ness beyond the Danube. The arms of Manuel were exercised on mount Taurus,

in the plains of Hungary, on the coast of Italy and Egypt, and on the seas of
Sicily

and Greece: the influence of his negotiations extended from Jerusalem to Rome

and Russia; and the Byzantine monarchy, for awhile, became an object of
respect

or terror to the powers of Asia and Europe. Educated in the silk and purple of

the east, Manual possessed the iron temper of a soldier, which cannot easily
be

paralleled, except in the lives of Richard I. of England, and of Charles XII.
of Swe­

den. Such was the strength and exercise in arms, that Raymond, surnamed the

Hercules of Antioch, was incapable of wielding the lance and buckler of the
Greek

emperor. In a famous tournament, he entered the lists on a fiery courser, and

overturned in his first career two of the stoutest of the Italian knights. The
first

in the charge, the last in the retreat, his friends and his enemies alike
trembled,

the former for his safety, and the latter for their own. After posting an
ambuscade

in a wood, he rode forth in quest of some perilous adventure, accompanied only
by

his brother and the faithful Axuch, who refused to desert their sovereign.
Eigh­

teen horsemen, after a short combat, fled before them: but the numbers of the

enemy increased; the march of the re-enforcement was tardy and fearful, and

Manuel, without receiving a wound, cut his way through a squadron of the
Turks.

In a battle against the Hungarians, impatient of the slowness of his troops,
he

snatched a standard from the head of the column, and was the first, almost
alone,

who passed a bridge that separated him from the enemy. In the same country,

after transporting his army beyond the Save, he sent back the boats, with an
order,

under pain of death, to their commander, that he should leave him to conquer
or

die on that hostile land. In the siege of Corfu, towing after him a captive
galley,

the emperor stood aloft on the poop, opposing against the volley of darts and
stones,,

a large buckler and a flowing sail; nor could he have escaped inevitable
death, had

not the Sicilian admiral enjoined his archers to respect the person of a hero.
In

one day, he is said to have slain above forty of the barbarians with his own
hand; he

returned to the camp, dragging along four Turkish prisoners, whom he had tied
to

the rings of his saddle: he was ever the foremost to provoke or accept a
single

combat; and the gigantic champions, who encountered his arm, were transpierced

by the lance, or cut asunder by the sword of the invincible Manuel. The story
of

his exploits, which appear as a model or a copy of the romances of chivalry,
may

induce a reasonable suspicion of the veracity of the Greeks: I will not, to
vindicate

their credit, endanger my own; yet I may observe, that in the long series of
their

annals, Manuel is the only prince who has been the subject of similar
exaggeration.

With the valour of a soldier, he did not unite the skill or prudence of a
general:

his victories were not productive of any permanent or useful conquest; and his

Turkish laurels were blasted in his last unfortunate campaign, in which he
lost his

armies in the mountains of Pisidia, and owed his deliverance to the generosity
of

the sultan. But the most singular feature in the character of Manuel, is the
con­

trast of labour and sloth, of hardiness and effeminacy. In war he seemed igno­

rant of peace; in peace he appeared incapable of war. In the field he slept in
the

sun or in the snow, tired in the longest marches the strength of his men and
horses;,

