OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 415

above the eify of Peace.(l) His son Motawakkel was a jealous and cruel tyrant:

odious to his subjects, he cast himself on the fidelity of the strangers, and
these

strangers, ambitious and apprehensive, were tempted by the rich promise of a
re­

volution. At the instigation, or at least in the cause of his son, they burst
into his

apartment at the hour of supper, and the caliph was cut into seven pieces by
the

same swords which he had recently distributed among the guards of his life and

throne. To this throne, yet streaming with a father's blood, Montasser was
tri­

umphantly led; but in a reign of six months, he found only the pangs of a
guilty

conscience. If he wept at the sight of an old tapestry which represented the
crime

and punishment of the sons of Chosroes; if his days were abridged by grief and

remorse, we may allow some pity to a parricide, who exclaimed in the
bitterness

of death, that he had lost both this world and the world to come. After this
act

of treason, the ensigns of royalty, the garment and walking-staff of Mahomet,

were given and torn away by the foreign mercenaries, who in four years
created,

deposed, and murdered three commanders of the faithful. As often as the Turks

were inflamed by fear, or rage, or avarice, these caliphs were dragged by the
feet,

exposed naked to the scorching sun, beaten with iron clubs, and compelled to
pur­

chase, by the abdication of their dignity, a short reprieve of inevitable
fate. (2)

At length, however, the fury of the tempest was spent or diverted: the
Abbassides

returned to the less turbulent residence of Bagdad; the insolence of the Turks

was curbed with a firmer and more skilful hand, and their numbers were divided

and destroyed in foreign warfare. But the nations of the east had been taught

to trample on the successors of the prophet; and the blessings of domestic
peace

were obtained by the relaxation of strength and discipline. So uniform are the

mischiefs of military despotism, that I seem to repeat the story of
theprxtorians of

Home.?3)

While the flame of enthusiasm was damped by the business, the pleasure, and

the knowledge, of the age, it burnt with concreted heat in the breasts of the
cho­

sen few, the congenial spirits, who were ambitious of reigning either in this
world

or in the next. How carefully soever the book of prophecy had been sealed by

the apostle of Mecca, the wishes, and (if we may profane the word,) even the

reason of fanaticism, might believe that, after the successive missions of
Adam,

Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Mahomet, the same God, in the fulness of

time, would reveal a still more perfect and permanent law. In the two hundred

and seventy-seventh year of the Hegira, and in the neighbourhood of Cufa, an.

Arabian preacher, of the name of Carmath, assumed the lofty and incomprehen­

sible style of the guide, the director, the demonstration, the word, the Holy
Ghost,

the camel, the herald of the Messiah, who had conversed with him in a human

shape, and the representative of Mahommed the son of Ali, of St. John the Bap­

tist, and of the angel Gabriel. In his mystic volume, the precepts of the
Koran

■were refined to a more spiritual sense: he relaxed the duties of ablution,
fasting,

and pilgrimage; allowed the indiscriminate use of wine and forbidden fruit;
and

nourished the fervour of his disciples by the daily repetition of fifty
prayers. The

idleness and ferment of the rustic crowd awakened the attention of the
magistrates

of Cufa; a timid persecution assisted the progress of the new sect, and the
name

of the prophet became more revered after his person had been withdrawn from

the world. His twelve apostles dispersed themselves among the Bedoweens, "a

race of men," says Abulfeda, " equally devoid of reason and religion;" and
the-

success of their preaching seemed to threaten Arabia with a new revolution.
The

Carmathians were ripe for rebellion, since they disclaimed the title of the
house

of Abbas, and abhorred the worldy pomp of the caliphs of Bagdad. They were

susceptible of discipline, since they vowed a blind and absolute submission to
the

imam, who was called to the prophetic office by the voice of God and the
people.

Instead of the legal tithes, he claimed the fifth of their substance and
spoil: the most

flagitious sins were no more than the type of disobedience; and the brethren
weret

(1) He changed the old names of Suroere, or Samara, into the fanciful title of
Sem&lrral, that which gire»

pleasure at first sight (D'Herbe)rit, Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 808,
d'Anvillc, l'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 97,98.)

(2) 'Tattea*speeimen,thedeatb of the caliph Motaz: Correptum pedibus
petrahunt, et sudibtis probe per-

taulcant,etspoliafum laceris vestibus in sole collocant, pne cujus, accerrimo
a»tu pedes alternis attolebat et

demittebat. Adltantiurn aliquis misero colaphos continuo ingerabat, quos ille
objectis manibus arertere stu-

detmt Quo facto traditus tortori fuit totoque ti-iduo cibo potuqueprohibitus
.... Suflbcatus, 8tc.

( Abulfeda, p. 206.) of the caliph Mohtadi, he says, cervices ipsi perpertris
scubas contundebant, testrculasquu

pedibus ooiKutlcabant (p. 208.)

(31 See under the feigns of lUotassepi, MotawaURel, MosMmEr. Moqpin, Slottx.
Mflhfarli and MoMmedi in

die Biblftmrqne of dllerbelSt, end die nowfanrUiav Annals of Eltnaon,
A&ulphitagius, and AT>ulfe.d».

