OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ray

The succeeding year was illustrated by a triumph of a very different kind, the

restitution of the true cross to the holy sepulchre. Heraclius performed in
per­

son the pilgrimage of Jerusalem, the identity of the relic was verified by the
dis­

creet patriarchal) and this august ceremony has been commemorated by the an­

nual festival of the exaltation of the cross. Before the emperor presumed to

tread the consecrated ground, he was instructed to strip himself ot the diadem

and purple, the pomp and vanity of the world: but in the judgment of his
clergy,

the persecution of the Jews was more easily reconciled with the precepts of
the

gospel. He again ascended his throne to receive the congratulations of the am­

bassadors of France and India: and the fame of Moses, Alexander, and Hercu­

les, (2) was eclipsed, in the popular estimation, by the superior merit and
glory of

the great Heraclius. Yet the deliverer of the east was indigent and feeble. Of

the Persian spoils, the most valuable portion had been expended in the war,
dis­

tributed to the soldiers, or buried, by an unlucky tempest, in the waves of
the

Euxine. The conscience of the emperor was oppressed by the obligation of re­

storing the wealth of the clergy, which he had borrowed for their own defence:
a

perpetual fund was required to satisfy these inexorable creditors; the
provinces,

already wasted by the arms and avarice of the Persians, were compelled to a
se­

cond payment of the same taxes, and the arrears of a simple citizen, the trea­

surer of Damascus, were commuted to a fine of one hundred thousand pieces of

gold. The loss of two hundred thousand soldiers(3) who had fallen by the
sword,

was of less fatal importance than the decay of arts, agriculture, and
population,

in this long and destructive war: and although a victorious army had been
formed

under the standard of Heraclius, the unnatural effort appears to have
exhausted

rather than exercised their strength. While the emperor triumphed at Constan­

tinople or Jerusalem, an obscure town on the confines of Syria was pillaged by
the

Saracens, and they cut in pieces some troops who advanced to its relief: an
ordi­

nary and trifling occurrence, had it not been the prelude of a mighty
revolution.

These robbers were the apostles of Mahomet; their fanatic valour had emerged

from the desert; and in the last eight years of his reign, Heraclius lost to
the Arabs

the same provinces which he had rescued from the Persians.

CHAPTER XLVII.

Theological history of the doctrine of the incarnation.—The human and divine
natures of

Christ.—Enmity of the patriarchs of Alexandria and Constantinople.—St. Cyril
and

Nestorius.—Third general council of Ephesus.—Heresy of Eutyches.—Fourth
general

council of C/ialcedon.—Civil and ecclesiastical discord.—Intolerance of
Justinian.—The

three chapters.—Monothelite controversy.—State of the oriental sects.—The
Nestorians.

—II. The Jacobites.—m. The Maronites.—lV. The Armenians.—\. The Copts and

Jlbyssinians.

After the extinction of paganism, the Christians in peace and piety might

have enjoyed their solitary triumph: but the principle of discord was alive in
their

bosom, and they were more solicitous to explore the nature, than to practise
the

laws, of their founder. I have already observed, that the disputes of the
Trini­

ty were succeeded by those of the Incarnation; alike scandalous to the church,

alike pernicious to the state, still more minute in their origin, still more
durable

in their effects. It is my design to comprise, in the present chapter, a
religious

war of two hundred and fifty years, to represent the ecclesiastical and
political

schism of the oriental sects, and to introduce their clamorous or sanguinary
con­

tests, by a modest inquiry into the doctrines of the primitive church. (4)

is mnch better suited to the present occasion. See his triumph in Theophanes,
(p. 872,273.) and Nicephorus,-

fp. 15,16.) The life of the mother and tenderness of the son are attested by
George of Pisidia, (Bell. Abar.

255, gee. p. 49.) The metaphor of the sabbath is used, somewhat profanely, by
these Byzantine Christians.

(1) See Baronius, (Anna). Eecles. A. D. 628. No. 1—4.) Eotychius, (Annal.
torn. iS. p. 240—248.) Nicephorus,

(Brev. p. 15.) The seals of the case had never been broken: and this
preservation of the cross is ascribed (un­

der God) to the devotion of queen Sira.

(2) George of Pisidia. Acroas. iii. de Expcdit. contra Persas, 415, Sec. and
Heraeleid, Across, i. 65—138. I

neglect the meaner parallels of Daniel, Timotheus, &c. Chosroes and the chagan
were of course compared

to Belslinzzar, Pharaoh, the old serpent, 8tc.

(3) Suidas (in Excerpt. Hist. Byzant. p. 40.) gives this number; but either
the Persian must be read for the

Isanrian war, or this passage does not belong to the emperor Heraclius.

(4) By what means shall I authenticate this previous inquiry, which I bare
studied to circumscribe ami

