OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 305

site to the realm of Persia. The kingdom of Yemen displays the limits, or at

least the situation of Arabia Felix: the name of Neged is extended over the
inland

space; and the birth of Mahomet has illustrated the province of Hejaz along
the

coast of the Red Sea.(l)

The measure of population is regulated by the means of subsistence; and the
in­

habitants of this vast peninsula might be outnumbered by the subjects of a
fertile

and industrious province. Along the shores of the Persian gulf, of the ocean,
and

even of the Red Sea, the Icthyofihagi,(2) or fish-eaters, continued to wander
in

quest of their precarious food. In this primitive and abject state, which ill
de­

serves the name of society, the human brute without art or laws, almost
without

sense or language, is poorly distinguished from the rest of the animal
creation.

Generations and ages might roll away in silent oblivion, and the helpless
savage

was restrained from multiplying his race, by the wants and pursuits which con­

fined his existence to the narrow margin of the sea-coast. But at an early
period

of antiquity the great body of the Arabs had emerged from this scene of
misery;

and as the naked wilderness could not maintain a people of hunters, they rose
at

once to the more secure and plentiful condition of the pastoral life. The same
life is

uniformly pursued by the roving tribes of the desert, and in the portrait of
the

modern Bedovieens, we may trace the features of their ancestors, (3) who, in
the

age of Moses or Mahomet dwelt under similar tents, and conducted their horses,

and camels, and sheep, to the same springs and pastures. Our toil is lessened,

and our wealth is increased, by our dominion over the useful animals: and the

Arabian shepherd had acquired the absolute possession of a faithful friend
-and a

laborious slave. (4) Arabia, in the opinion of the naturalist, is the genuine
and

original country of the horse; the climate most propitious, not indeed to the
size,

but to the spirit and swiftness, of that generous animal. The merit of the
Barb,

the Spanish, and the English breed, is derived from a mixture of Arabian blood
;(5)

the Bedoweens preserve, with superstitious care, the honours and the memory of

the purest race; the males are sold at a high price, but the females are
seldom

alienated: and the birth of a noble foal was esteemed among the tribes as a
subject

of joy and mutual congratulation. These horses are educated in the tents,
among

the children of the Arabs, with a tender familiarity, which trains them in the
ha­

bits of gentleness and attachment. They are accustomed only to walk and to
gal­

lop: their sensations are not blunted by the incessant abuse of the spur and
the

whip: their powers are reserved for the moments of flight and pursuit; but no

sooner do they feel the touch of the hand or the stirrup, than they dart away
with

the swiftness of the wind; and if their friend be dismounted in the rapid
career,

they instantly stop till he has recovered his seat. In the sands of Africa and
Ara­

bia, the camel is a sacred and precious gift. That strong and patient beast of
bur­

den can perform, without eating and drinking, a journey of several days; and a
re­

servoir of fresh water is preserved in a large bag, a fifth stomach of the
animal,

whose body is imprinted with the marks of servitude; the larger breed is
capable

of transporting a weight of a thousand pounds, and the dromedary, of a
lighter,

and more active frame, outstrips the fleetest courser in the race. Alive or
dead,

almost every part of the camel is serviceable to man; her milk is plentiful
and nu­

tritious: the younger and tender flesh has the taste of veal:(6) a valuable
salt is

extracted from the urine: the dung supplies the deficiency of fuel; and the
lonjj

(1) Consult, penile, and study the Specimen Historia Arebum of Pncock! (Oxon.
1650, in 4to.) The thirty

pages of text and version are extracted from the Dynasties of Gregory
Abulpharagius, which Pocock after­

wards translated: (Oxon. 1663, in 4to.) the three hundred and fifty-eight
notes from a classic and original

work on the Arabian antiquities.

(2) Arrian remarks the Icthvophagi of the coast of Hejaz. (Periplns Maris
Erythrsei, p. 12.) and beyond

Aden. (p. 15.) It seems probable that the shores of the Red Sea, (in the
largest sense) were occupied by these

savages in the time, perhaps, of Cyrus; but I can hardly believe that any
cannibals were left among the sa,

vages in the reign of Justinian. (Proeop. de Bell. Persic, lib. i. c. 19.)

(3) See the Specimen Historian Arnbum of Pocock, p. 2. 5. 86, _&c. The journey
of M. d'Arvieux, in 1664,

to the camp of the emir of mount Carme), (Voyage de la Palestine, Amsterdam.
1718.) exhibits a pleasing nnd

original picture of the life of the Bedoweens, which may be illustrated from
Niebubr (Description de l'Arabie,

p. 327—344.) and Volney, (torn. i. p. 343—335.) the last and most judicious of
our Syrian travellers.

(4) Read (it is no unpleasant task) the incomparable articles of* the horse,
and the cnmel, in the Natural His­

tory of M. de Buffon.

(5) For the Arabian horses, see d'Arvieux (p. 159—173.) and Nicbuhr. (p.
142—144.) At the end of the

thirteenth century, the. bones of Naged were esteemed sure-footed, those of
Yemen strong and serviceable,

those of Hejaz most noble. The horses of Europe, the tenth and last class,
were generally despised, as having

too much body and too little spirit: d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient. p#339.)
their strength was requisite to bear the

weight of the knight and his armour.

(6) Qui carnibus camelorura vesci solent odii tenaces sunt, was the opinion of
an Arabian physician. (Po­

cock, Specimen, p. 88.) Mahomet himself, who was fond of milk, prefers the
cow, and does not even menttvn

V<je. III. 39

