THE DECLINE AND FALL

ca might applaud the success and spirit of the faithful, who had already lost
sight

of the northern bear, and had almost transcended the bounds of the habitable

world. (1) Again turning towards the west and the Roman empire, they repassed

the Tigris over the bridge of Mosul, and, in the captive provinces of Armenia
and

Mesopotamia, embraced their victorious brethren of the Syrian army. From the

palace of Madayn their eastern progress was not less rapid or extensive. They

advanced along the Tigris and the gulf; penetrated through the passes of the

mountains into the valley of Estachar or Persepolis; and profaned the last
sanc­

tuary of the Magian empire. The grandson of Chosroes was nearly surprised

among the falling columns and mutilated figures; a sad emblem of the past and

present fortune of Persia:(2) he fled with accelerated haste over the desert
of Kir-

man,'implored the aid of the warlike Segestans, and sought an humble refuge on

the verge of the Turkish and Chinese power. But a victorious army is
insensible

of fatigue: the Arabs divided their forces in the pursuit of a timorous enemy;
and

the caliph Othman promised the government of Chorasan to the first general who

should enter that large and populous country, the kingdom of the ancient Bac-

trians. The condition was accepted; the prize was deserved; the standard of
Ma­

homet was planted on the walls of Herat, Merou, and Balch; and the successful

leader neither halted nor reposed till his foaming cavalry had tasted the
waters of

the Oxus. In the public anarchy, the independent governors of the cities and

castles obtained their separate capitulations; the terms were granted or
imposed

by the esteem, the prudence, or the compassion of the victors; and a simple
pro­

fession of faith established the distinction between a brother and a slave.
After

a noble defence, Harmozan, the prince or satrap of"Ahwaz and Susa, was com­

pelled to surrender his person and his state to the discretion of the caliph;
and

their interview exhibits a portrait of the Arabian manners. In the presence,
and

by the command of Omar, the gay barbarian was despoiled of his silken robes
em­

broidered with gold, and of his tiara bedecked with rubies and emeralds. " Are

?rau now sensible," said the conqueror to his naked captive, "are you now
sensi-

)le of the judgment of God, and of the different rewards of infidelity and
obedi- ,

ence?" " Alas!" replied Harmozan, " I feel them too deeply. In the days of our

common ignorance, we fought with the weapons of the flesh, and my nation was

superior. God was then neuter: since he has espoused your quarrel, you have

subverted our kingdom and religion." Oppressed by this painful dialogue, the

Persian complained of intolerable thirst, but discovered some apprehensions
lest

he should be killed whilst he was drinking a cup of water. " Be of good
courage,"

said the caliph, " your life is safe till you have drank this water;" the
crafty satrap

accepted the assurance, and instantly dashed the vase against the ground. Omar

would have avenged the deceit; but his companions represented the sanctity of

an oath; and the speedy conversion of Harmozan entitled him not only to a free

pardon, but even to a stipend of two thousand pieces of gold. The
administration

of Persia was regulated by an actual survey of the people, the cattle, and the

fruits of the earth ;(3) and this monument, which attests the vigilance of the
ca­

liphs, might have instructed the philosophers of every age.(4)

The flight of Yezdegerd had carried him beyond the Oxus, and as far as the

Jaxavtes, two rivers(S) of ancient and modern renown, which descend from the

mountains of India towards the Caspian sea. He was hospitably entertained by

Tarkhan, prince of Fargana,(6) a fertile province on the Jaxartes; the king of
Sa­

to Ic is in such a style of ignorance and wonder that the Athenian orator
describes the Arctic conquest! of

Alexander, who never advances beyond the shores of the Caspian, A**!:xvJpo? ms
«pxrou ui m; oixcwumk

altymSiiv, muriK /*i&ijTT»ixsi. Esrhines contra Ctesiphontem, torn. iii.
p.554.edit. Grace. Orator. Reiske. This me­

morable cause was pleaded at Athens, Olymp. 112. 3., (before Chnst 300) in the
autumn (Tayler, praefat. p.

370, &c.) about a year after the battle of Arbclal and Alexander, in the
pursuit of Darius, was marching to­

wards Hyrcania and Bactriana.

(2) We are indebted for this curious particular to the Dynasties of
Ahulpharagitis, p. 118. but it is needless

to prove the identity of Estachar and Persepolis (d'Herbelot, p. 327.) and
still more needless to copy the draw­

ing* and descriptions of Sir John Chardin, or Corneille le Bruyn.

(3) After the conquest of Persia, Theophones, adds, «u™ y; Tw xpova fxs\nj<rt,
Cvuxeo, av%yp*&nnt snsnsv -rt*

uir <euTCv OIXM/Uvxv. eysMTO £l ») stvxypx$x xxi avBpoiruiv xo»i xtkvwv xxi
Juimv, (Chronograph, p. 283.)

(4) Amidst our meagre relations, I must regret, that d'Herbelot has not found
and used a Persian translation

of Tabari, enriched, as he says, with many extracts from the native historians
of the Ghebers or Magi. (Biblio-

theque Orientate, p. 1014.)

(5) The most authentic accounts of the two rivers, the Sihon, (Jaxartes) and
the Gihon, (Oxus,) may be found

in Sherif al Edrisi, (Geograph. Kubiens. p. 138.) Abulfeda, Descript.
Chorasan. in Hudson, torn. iii. p. 23.)

Abulghazi Khan, who reigned on their banks, (Hist. Genealogique ties Tartars,
p. 32. 57.700.) and the Turk­

ish Geographer, a MS. in tho king of France's library. (Examen Critique des
Huloriens d' Alexander, p. 194

(6) The territory of Fargana is described by Abulfeda, p. W, 77.

