THE DECLINE AND FALL

The experiment was tried without effect, and the timid or vehement catholics

condemned even the semblance of a retreat in the presence of a subtle and
auda­

cious enemy. The orthodox (the prevailing) party devised new modes of speech,

and argument, and interpretation, to their nature of Christ, they preciously
ap­

plied a proper and distant energy; but the difference was no longer visible
when

they allowed that the human and the divine will were invariably the same. (1)
The

disease was attended with the customary symptoms; but the Greek clergy, as if

satiated with the endless controversy of the incarnation, instilled a healing
coun­

sel into the ear of the prince and people. They declared themselves monothe-

lites (assertors of the unity of will,) but they treated the words as new, the

questions as superfluous; and recommended a religious silence as the most
agree­

able to the prudence and charity of the gospel. This law of silence was suc­

cessively imposed by the ecthesis or exposition of Heraclius, the type or
model of

his grandson Constans:(2) and the imperfect edicts were subscribed with
alacrity

or reluctance by the four patriarchs of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, and

Antioch. But the bishop and monks of Jerusalem sounded the alarm: in the lan­

guage, or even in the silence, of the Greeks, the Latin churches detected a
latent

heresy; and the obedience of pope Honorius to the commands of his sovereign

was retracted and censured by the bolder ignorance of his successors. They

condemned the execrable and abominable heresy of the Monothelites, who re­

vived the errors of Manes, Apollinaris, Eutyches, &c.; they signed the
sentence

of excommunication on the tomb of St. Peter; the ink was mingled with the
sacra­

mental wine, the blood of Christ; and no ceremony was omitted that could fill
the

superstitious mind with horror and affright. As the representative of the
western

church, pope Martin and his Lateran synod anathematized the perfidious and

guilty silence of the Greeks; one hundred and five bishops of Italy, for the
most

part the subjects of Constans, presumed to reprobate his wicked tyfie and the
im­

pious ecthesis of his grandfather, and to confound the authors, and their
adherents,

with the twenty-one notorious heretics, the apostates from the church, and the
or­

gans of the devil. Such an insult under the tamest reign could not pass with
im­

punity. Pope Martin ended his days' on the inhospitable shore of the Tauric

Chersonesus; and his oracle, the abbot Maximus, was inhumanly chastised by the

amputation of his tongue and his right hand. (3) But the same invincible
spirit

survived in their successors, and the triumph of the Latins avenged their
recent

defeat, and obliterated the disgrace of the three chapters. The synods of Rome

were confirmed by the sixth general council of Constantinople, in the palace
and

the presence of a new Constantine, a descendant of Heraclius. The royal con­

vert converted the Byzantine pontiff and a majority of the bishops;(4) the
dis­

senters, with their chief, Macarius of Antioch, were condemned to the
spiritual

and temporal pains of heresy; the east condescended to accept the lessons of
the

west; and the creed was finally settled, which teaches the catholics of every
age,

that two wills or energies are harmonized in the person of Christ. The majesty

of the pope and the Roman synod was represented by two priests, one deacon,
and

three bishops: but these obscure Latins had neither arms to compel, nor
treasures

to bribe, nor language to persuade; and I am ignorant by what arts they could
de­

termine the lofty emperor of the Greeks to abjure the cathechism of his
infancy,

and to persecute the religion of his fathers. Perhaps the monks and people of

Constantinople^) were favourable to the Lateran creed, which is indeed the
least

it. p. 292.) Hid. Dynast, p. 21. vers. Latin Poeock,) and Assemah himself,
torn. iv. p. 218.) They seem igno­

rant that they might allege the positive authority of the ecthesis. *0 pixpoc
Nso-to^o? xxma Suttpvv tijv oei*?

tou Kvptow ev^vSpjmiiriv, xxi Sua lurxyw vtouf, (the common reproach of the
Monophysites,) Sua 5sxij«*t* tovt**

t^iiv am ETOAjujn, Tauvxvriav £f tmto BmUw t«jv .... Sua Traao-M^m eiogsetre.
Concil. torn. vii. p. 205.)

(1) See the orthodox faith in Petavius: (Dogmata Theolog. torn. v. lib. is. e.
6—10, p. 433—447.) all the

depths of this controversy are founded in the Greek dialogue between Maximus
and Pyrrhus, (ad calcem, torn.

Tut. Amial. Baron, p. 755—794.) which relates a real conference, and produced
as short-lived a conversion.

(2) Implissimam ecthesim .... scelerosum typum (Concil. torn. vii. p. 366.)
diabolical operationis geninri-

na, (sors, germina, or else the Greek yjwtpa-ra in the original. Concil. p.
363,364.) are the expressions of the

eighteenth anathema. The epistle of pope Martin to Amandus, a Gallican bishop,
stigmatizes the Monothe­

lites and their heresy with equal virulence, (p. 392.)

(3) The sufferings of Martin and Maximus are described with pathetic
simplicity in the original letters and

acts. _ (Concil. torn. vii. p. 68—78. Baron. Annal. Eccies. A. D. 656, No. 2.
et annos. subsequent.) Yet the

chastisement of their disobedience, egopia and o-w^ztc; 0*1x107*0;, had been
previously announced in tie type of

Constans. (Concil. torn. vii. p. 240.)

(4) Eutychius (Annal. torn. ii. p. 368.) most erroneously supposes that the
one hundred and twenty-four bi­

shops of the Roman synod transported themselves to Constantinople; and, by
adding them to the one hundred

and sixty-eight Greeks, thus composes the ninth council of two hundred and
ninety-two fathers.

(5) The Monothelite Constans was hated by all Sua vat twjw (says Theophanes,
Chron. p. 292.) sMie-rfn o$ojp

■.r*jx show When the Jlouothclite monk foiled in this inioicIe,the people
shouted c j.»t; .n^rs. (Coacil.

