S74 THE DECLINE AND FALL

curious and interesting facts are buried in oblivion; the three great
historians of

Rome have been transmitted to our hands in a mutilated state, and we are
deprived

of many pleasing compositions of the lyric, ia&ibic, and dramatic poetry of
the

Greeks. Yet we should gratefully remember, that the mischances of time and

accident have spared the classic works to which the suffrage of antiquity(l)
had

adjudged the first place of genius and glory; the teachers of ancient
knowledge,

who are still extant, had perused and compared the writings of their predeces­

sors;^) nor can it fairly be presumed that any important truth, any useful
disco­

very in art or nature, has been snatched away from the curiosity of modern
ages.

In the administration of Egypt,(3) Amrou balanced the demands of justice and

policy: the interest of the people of the law, who were defended by God; and
of

the people of the alliance, who were protected by man. In the recent tumult of

conquest and deliverance, the tongue of the Copts and the sword of the Arabs

were most adverse to the tranquillity of the province. To the former, Amrou
de­

clared, that faction and falsehood would be doubly chastised; by the
punishment

of the accusers, whom he should detest as his personal enemies, and by the
pro­

motion of their innocent brethren, whom their envy had laboured to injure and

supplant. He excited the latter by the motives of religion and honour to
sustain

the dignity of their character, to endear themselves by a modest and temperate

conduct to God and the caliph, to spare and protect a people who had trusted
to

their faith, and to content themselves with the legitimate and splendid
rewards of

their victory. In the management of the revenue he disapproved the simple but

oppressive mode of a capitation, and preferred with reason a proportion of
taxes,

deducted on every branch from the clear profits of agriculture and commerce.

A third part of the tribute was appropriated to the annual repairs of the
dikes and

canals, so essential to the public welfare. Under his administration the
fertility

of Egypt supplied the dearth of Arabia; and a string of camels, laden with
corn

and provisions, covered almost without an interval the long road "from Memphis

to Medina. (4) But the genius of Amrou soon venewed the maritime communica­

tion which had been attempted or achieved by the Pharaohs, the Ptolemies, or

the Caesars; and a canal, at least eighty miles in length, was opened from the
Nile

to the Red Sea. This inland navigation, which would have joined the Mediterra­

nean and the Indian ocean, was soon discontinued as useless and dangerous; the

throne was removed from Medina to Damascus; and the Grecian fleets might have

explored a passage to the holy cities of Arabia. (5)

Of his new conquest the caliph Omar had an imperfect knowledge from the

voice of fame and the legends of the Koran. He requested that his lieutenant

would place before his eyes the realm of Pharaoh and the Amalekites; and the

answer of Amrou exhibits a lively and not unfaithful picture of that singular
coun­

try.^) "O commander of the faithful, Egypt is a compound of black earth and

green plants, between a pulverized mountain and a red sand. The distance from

Syene to the sea is a month's journey for a horseman. Along the valley
descends

a river, on which the blessings of the Most High reposes both in the evening
and

morning, and which rises and falls with the revolutions of the sun and moon.
When

the annual dispensation of Providence unlocks the springs and fountains that
nou­

rish the earth, the Nile rolls his swelling and sounding waters through the
realm

of Egypt: the fields are overspread by the salutary flood; and the villages
commu­

nicate with each other in their painted barks. The retreat of the inundation
de-

posites a fertilizing mud for the reception of the various seeds; the crowds
of hus­

bandmen who blacken the land may be compared to a swarm of industrious ants;

and their native indolence^s quickened by the lash of the taskmaster, and the
pro-

(1) I have often perused with pleasure a chapter of Quintilian, (Imtitut.
Orator. 10. 1.) in which that judi­

cious critic enumerates and appreciate! the series of Greek and Latin
classics.

(2) Such as Galen, Pliny, Aristotle, &c. On this subject Wotton (Reflections
on Ancient and Modern

Learning;, p. 85—95.) argues with solid sense against the lively exotic
fancies of Sir William Temple. The con­

tempt of the Greeks For barbaric science, would scarcely admit the Indian or
Kthiopie books into the library

of Alexandria; nor is it proved that philosophy has sustnine;l any real loss
from their exclusion.

(3) This curious and authentic intelligence of Murtadi (p. 284—289.) has not
been discovered either by Ock-

lcy, or by the self-sufficient compilers of the Modern Universal History.

(4) Eutychius, Annal. torn. ii. p. 320. Elmacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 35.

(5) On these el/trure canals, the reader may try tosalisfy himself from
d*Anville(Mem. snr l'Egypte, p. 108—

110. 124. 132.,) and a learned thesis maintained and printed at Strashurg in
the year 1770 (Jungendorum ma-

litim fluviorumque molimina. p. 30— 47. 03—70.) Even the supine Turks have
agitated the old project of join­

ing the two seas (Memoirei de Baron de Tott, torn, ir.)

(6) A small volume, des Marveilles. ccc. de l'Egypte. composed in the
thirteenth century by Mortarls of

Cairo, and translated from au Arabic MS. of cardinal Mazann, was published by
Pierre Vatier, Paris. 166A-

The antiquities of Egypt are wild and legendary: but the writer deserves
credit and esteem for his account of

the conquest and geography of his native country. (See the correspondence of
Amrou and Omar. p. 279—280.)

