OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE.

dain his diminutive planet and momentary existence. The costly instruments of

observation were supplied by the caliph Almamon, and the land of the Chaldeans

still afforded the same spacious level, the same unclouded horizon. In the
plains

of Sinaar, and a second time in those of Cufa, his mathematicians accurately
mea­

sured a degree of the great circle of the earth, and determined at twenty-four

thousand miles the entire circumference of our globe. (1) From the reign of
the

Abbassides to that of the grand-children of Tamerlane, the stars without the
aid

of glasses, were diligently observed; and the astronomical tables(2) of
Bagdad,

Spain, and Samarcand, correct some minute errors, without daring to renounce

the hypothesis of Ptolemy, without advancing a step towards the discovery of
the

solar system. In the eastern courts, the truths of science could be
recommended

only by ignorance and folly, and the astronomer would have been disregarded,

had he not debased his wisdom or honesty by the vain predictions of astrology.
(3)

But in the science of medicine, the Arabians have been deservedly applauded.

The names of Mesua and Geber, of Hazis and Avicenna, are ranked with the

Grecian masters: in the city of Bagdad, eight hundred and sixty physicians
were

licensed to exercise their lucrative profession:(4) in Spain, the life of the
catholic

princes was intrusted to the skill of the Saracens,(5) and the school of
Salerno,

with their legitimate offspring revived in Italy and Europe the precepts of
the

healing art. (6) The success of each professor must have been influenced by
per­

sonal and accidental causes; but we may form a less fanciful estimate of their
ge­

neral knowledge of anatomy,(7) botany,(8) and chemistry,(9) the three-fold
basis

of their theory and practice. A superstitious reverence for the dead confined
both

the Greeks and the Arabians to the dissection of apes and quadrupeds; the more

solid and visible parts were known in the time of Galen, and the finer
scrutiny of

the human frame was reserved for the microscope and the injections of modern

artists. Botany is an active science, and the discoveries of the torrid zone
might

enrich the herbal of Dioscorides with two thousand plants. Some traditionary

knowledge might be secreted in the temples and monasteries of Egypt; much use­

ful experience had been acquired in the practice of arts and manufactures; but

the science of chemistry owes its origin and improvement to the industry of
the Sa­

racens. They first invented and named the alembic for the purposes of
distilla­

tion, analyzed the substances of the three kingdoms of nature; tried the
distinction

and affinites of alkalis and acids, and converted the poisonous minerals into
soft

and salutary medicines. But the most eager search of Arabian chemistry was the

transmutation of metals, and the elixir of immortal health: the reason and the
for­

tunes of thousands were evaporated in the crucibles of alchymy, and the
consum­

mation of the great work was promoted by the worthy aid of mystery, fable, and

superstition.

But the Moslems deprived themselves of" the principal benefits of a familiar
in­

tercourse with Greece and Rome, the knowledge of antiquity, the purity of
taste,

and the freedom of thought. Confident in the riches of their native tongue,
the

(1) Ahulfeda (Annal. Modem, p. 210, 211. vers. Reiske) describes this
operation according to Ibn Chalecau

•nd the best histurinns. This degree most accurately contains two hundred
thousand royal or Hathemite cu­

bits, which Arabia had derived from the sacred and legal practice hnlh of
Palestine and Egypt. This ancient

cubit is repeated four hundred times in each basis of the great pyramid, and
seems to indicate the primitive unci

universal measures of the east. See the Metrologie of the laborious M.
Paucton, p. 101—105.

r' (2) See the Astronomical Tables of TJlugh Begh, with the preface of Dr.
Hyde, in the first volume of Lis

Syntagma Dissertationum, Oxon. 1767.

(3) The truth of astrology wis allowed by Albumazar, and the best of the
Arabian astronomers, who drew

their most certain predictions, not from Venus and Mercury, but from Jupiter
and the sun. (Abulpharag.

Dynast, p. 161—16».) For Use state and science of the Persian astronomers, see
Cliardin. (Voyages en Perse,

torn. iii. p. 162—203.)

(4) Biblior. Aribico-IIispana, torn. i. 'p. 438. The original relates a
pleasant tale, of an ignorant but harmless

practitioner.

(5) In the year 056, Sancho the Fat, king of Leon was cured by the physicians
of Cordova. (Mariana, lib.

viii. c. 7. torn. i. p. 318.)

(6) The school of Salemo, and the introduction of the Arabian sciences into
Italy, are discussed with learn­

ing and judgment by Muratori, (A ntiquitat. Italia; Medii £vi, torn. iii. p.
932—940.) and Giannone. (Istoria

Ctvili di Napoli, torn. ii. p. 119—127.)

(7) See a good view of the progress of anatomy in Wotton. (Reflections on
ancient and modern Learning, p.

208—2J6.) Hit repulation has been unworthily depreciated by the wits in the
controversy of Boyle and Bent-

ley.

(8) Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. i. p. 275. Al Beithar of Malaga, their
greatest botanist, had travelled into Af­

rica, Persia, and India.

(o) Dr. Watson (Elements of Chemistry, vol. i. p. 17. &c.) allows the original
merit of the Arabians. Vet he

quotes the modest confession of the famous Geber of the ninth century,
(d'Herbelot, p. SI7.) that he had drawn

most of his science, perhaps of the transmutaiion of metals, from the ancient
sages. Whatever might he the

origin or extent of their knowledge, the arts of chemistry and alchymy appear
to have been known in Egypt at

least tliree hundred years before Mahomet. (Wotton's Reflections, p. 121—153.
Paow, Recherches sur lei

UgTptiens tt let Chinois, torn. \. p. 376—429.)

