270 THE DECLINE AND FALL

posite passions, a larger scope was, allowed in the revolutions of antiquity,
than in

the smooth and solid temper of the modem world, which cannot easily repeat

either the triumph of Alexander or the fall of Darius. But the peculiar
infelicity

of the Byzantine princes exposed them to domestic perils, without affording
any

lively promise of foreign conquest. From the pinnacle of greatness, Andronicus

was precipitated by a death more cruel and shameful than than that of the
vilest

malefactor; but the most glorious of his predecessors had much more to dread

from their subjects than to hope from their enemies. The army_ was licentious

without spirit, the nation turbulent without freedom; the barbarians of the
east

and west pressed on the monarchy, and the loss of the provinces was terminated

by the final servitude of the capital.

The entire series of Roman emperors, from the first of the Caesars to the last
of

the Constantines, extends above fifteen hundred years: and the term of
dominion,

unbroken by foreign conquest, surpassesthe measure of the ancient monarchies;

the Assyrians or Medes, the successors of Cyrus, or those of Alexander.

CHAPTER XLIX.

Introduction, worship, and persecution of images.—Revolt of Italy and
Rome.—Temporal

dominion of the popes.—Conquest of Italy by the Franks—Establishment of
Images.

—Character and coronation of Charlemagne.—Restoration and decay of the Roman
em­

pire in the west.—Independence of Italy.—Constitution of the Germanic body.

In the connexion of the church and state, I have considered the former as sub­

servient only, and relative to the latter; a salutary maxim, if in fact, as
well as in

narrative, it had ever been held sacred. The oriental philosophy of the
Gnostics,

tlje dark abyss of predestination and grace, and the strange transformations
of the

eucharist from the sign to the substance of Christ's body.fl) I have purposely

abandoned to the curiosity of the speculative divines. But I nave reviewed,
with

diligence and pleasure, the objects of ecclesiastical history, by which the
decline

and fall of the Roman empire were materially affected, the propagation of
Chris­

tianity, the constitution of the catholic church, the ruin of paganism, and
the sects

that arose from the mysterious controversies concerning the Trinity and
incarna­

tion. At the head of this class, we may justly rank the worship of images, so

fiercely disputed in the eighth and ninth centuries; since a question of
popular su­

perstition produced the revolt of Italy, the temporal power of the popes, and
the

restoration of the Roman empire in the west.

The primitive Christians were possessed with an unconquerable repugnance to

the use and abuse of images, and this aversion may be ascribed to their
descent

from the Jews, and their enmity to the Greeks. The Mosaic law had severely

proscribed all representations of the Deity; and that precept was firmly
established,

in the principles and practice of the chosen people. The wit of the Christian
apo­

logists was pointed against the foolish idolaters, who bowed before the
workman­

ship of their own hands; the images of brass and marble, which, had they been
en­

dowed with sense and motion, should have started rather from the pedestal to

adore the creative powers of the artist. (2) Perhaps some recent and imperfect

converts of the Gnostic tribe, might crown the statues of Christ and St. Paul
with

the profane honours which they paid to those of Aristotle and Pythagoras;(3)
but

the public religion of the catholics was uniformly simple and spiritual; and
the first

notice of the use of pictures is in the censure of the council of Illiberis,
three hundred

years after the Christian era. Under the successors of Constantine, in the
peace

and luxury of the triumphant church, the more prudent bishops condescended to

indulge a visible superstition, for the benefit of the multitude; and, after
the ruin

of paganism, they were no ionger restrained by the apprehension of an odious

parallel. The first introduction of a symbolic worship was in the veneration
of

the cross, and of relics. The saints and martyrs, whose intercession was
implored

f 0 The learned Selden has given the history of transnbstantiation in a
comprehensive and pithy sentence.—

" This opinion is only rhetoric turned into logic." (His Works, vol. iii. p.
2073. in his Tabletalk.)

(2) Nec intelligunt homines ineptissimi, quod si sentire simulacra et rqoveri
possent, adoratnra hominem

fuissent a quo sunt expolira. (Divin. Instittu. lib. ii. c. 2.) Lactantius is
the last as well as (he most eloqueot,

of the Latin apologists. Their raillery of idols attacks not only the object,
but the form and matter.

(3) See Irenaeus, Epiphauius,and Augustin. fBasnage, Hist, des Egiises
Reformees, torn. ii. p. 1313.) This

Gnostic practice has a singular affinity with the private worship of Alexander
Severut. (Lampridius, c. 39.

Gardner, Heathen Testimonies, vol. iii. p. 34.)

