THE DECLINE AND FALL

When Justinian first meditated the conquest of Italy, he sent ambassadors to
the

kings of the Franks, and adjured them, by the common ties of alliance and
religion,

to join in the holy enterprise against the Arians. The Goths, as their wants
were

more urgent, employed a more effectual mode of persuasion, and vainly strove,
by

the gift of lands and money, to purchase the friendship, or at least the
neutrality

of a light and perfidious nation. (1) But the arms of Belisarius, and the
revolt of

the Italians, had no sooner shaken the Gothic monarchy, than Theodebert of
Aus­

tralia, the most powerful and warlike of the Merovingian kings, was persuaded
to

succour their distress by an indirect and seasonable aid. Without expecting
the

consent of their sovereign, ten thousand Burgundians, his recent subjects,
descend­

ed from the Alps, and joined the troops which Vitiges had sent to chastise the
re­

volt of Milan. After an obstinate siege, the capital of Liguria was reduced by
fa­

mine, but no capitulation could be obtained, except for the safe retreat of
the Ro­

man garrison. Datius, the orthodox bishop, who had seduced his countrymen to

rebellion(2) and ruin, escaped to the luxury and honours of the Byzantine
court;(3)

but the clergy, perhaps the Arian clergy, were slaughtered at the foot of
their own

altars by the defenders of the catholic faith. Three hundred thousand males
were

reported to be slain;(4) the female sex, and the more precious spoil, was
resigned

to the Burgundians; and the houses, or at least the walls of Milan, were
levelled

with the ground. The Goths, in their last moments, were revenged by the des­

truction of a city, second only to Rome in size and opulence, in the splendour
of its

buildings, or the number of its inhabitants; and Belisarius sympathized alone
in the

fate of his deserted and devoted friends. Encouraged by this successful
inroad,

Theodebert himself, in the ensuing spring, invaded the plains of Italy with an
ar­

my of one hundred thousand barbarians. (5) The king, and some chosen
followers,

were 'mounted on horseback, and armed with lances; the infantry, without bows

or spears, were satisfied with a shield, a sword, and a double-edged battle-
axe,

which, in their hands, became a deadly and unerring weapon. Italy trembled at

the march of the Franks; and both the Gothic prince and the Roman general,
alike

ignorant of their designs, solicited, with hope and terror, the friendship of
these

dangerous allies. Till he had secured the passage of the Po on the bridge of
Pa-

via, the grandson of Clovis dissembled his intentions, which he at length
declared,

by assaulting, almost at the same instant, the hostile camps of the Romans and

Goths. Instead of uniting their arms, they fled with equal precipitation; and
the

fertile, though desolate, provinces of Liguria and JEmilia, were abandoned to
a li­

centious host of barbarians, whose rage was not mitigated by any thoughts of
set­

tlement or conquest. Among the cities which they ruined, Genoa, not yet con­

structed of marble, is particularly enumerated: and the deaths of thousands,
ac­

cording to the regular practice of war, appear to have excited less horror
than

some idolatrous sacrifices of women and children, which were performed with
im­

punity in the camp of the most Christian king. If it were not a melancholy
truth,

that the first and most cruel sufferings must be the lot of the innocent and
helpless,

<history might exult in the misery of the conquerors, who, in the midst of
riches,

>were left destitute of bread or wine, reduced to drink the waters of the Po,
and to

-feed on the flesh of distempered cattle. The dysentery swept away one-third of  
their army; and the clamours of his subjects, who were impatient to pass the
Alps,

disposed Theodebert to listen with respect to the mild exhortation of
Belisarius,

The memory of this inglorious and destructive warfare was perpetuated on the

medals of Gaul: and Justinian, without unsheathing his sword, assumed the
title of

conqueror of the Franks. The Merovingian prince was offended by the vanity of

the emperor; he affected to pity the fallen fortunes of the Goths; and his
insidious

offer of a federal union was fortified by the promise or menace of descending
from

the Alps at the head of five hundred thousand men. His plans of conquest were

(1) This national reproach of perfidy (Procop. Gotli. lib. ii. c. 25.) offends
the ear of La Mothe le Vayer

(torn. viii. p. 163—165..; who criticises, as if he had not read the Greek
historian.

(2) Baroaius applauds his treason, and justifies the catholic bishops—qui ne
sab heretico principe degant

omnem lapidem movant—a useful caution. The more rational Muratori (Annali
d'ltalia, torn. v. p. 54.)

iiints at the guilt of perjury, and blames at least the imprudence of Datius.

(S) St. Datius was more successful against devils than against barbarians. He
travelled with a numerous

retinue, and occupied at Corinth a large house (Baronius, A. D. 538. Mo. 89,
A. D. 539. No. 20.)

(4) MupiosJes TpiMKovrz (compare Procopius. Goth. lib. ii. c. 7.21.) Yet such
papulation is incredible; und the

second or third city of Italy need not repine if we only decimate the numbers
of the present text. Both Milan

and Genoa revived in less than thirty years (Paul Diacoa. de Gestis Langobard,
lib. ii. c. 36.

(5) Besides Procopius, perhaps too Homan, see the Chronicles of Marius and
Marcellinus, Jornandes (in

Success. Rega. in Muratori, torn. i. p. 241.,) and Gregory of Tours, (lib.
iii. c. 32. in torn. ii. of the Historians

of France.) Gregory supposes a defeat of Beluarius, who, in Almoin (de Gejtfs
Franc, lib. ii. c 53, in torn,

iii. p. 59.,) is^Iain by the Franks.

