OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. , Syf

composition, should suspect his own ignorance, and that of his Byzantine
guides,

so prone to the marvellous, so careless, and, in this instance, so jealous of
the truth.

From their obscure, and perhaps fallacious hints, it should seem that the
principal

ingredient of the Greek fire was the nafitha,{l) or liquid bitumen, a light
tena­

cious, and inflammable oil,(2) which springs from the earth, and catches fire
as

soon as it comes in contact with the air. The naptha was mingled, I know not
by

what methods or in what proportions, with sulphur and with the pitch that is
ex­

tracted from evergreen firs. (3) From this mixture, which produces a thick
smoke

and a loud explosion, proceeded a fierce and obstinate flame, which not only
rose

in perpendicular ascent, but likewise burnt with equal vehemence in descent or

lateral progress; instead of being extinguished, it was nourished and
quickened, by

the element of water; and sand, urine, or vinegar, were the only remedies that

could damp the fury of this powerful agent, which was justly denominated by
the

Greeks the liquid or the maritime fire. For the annoyance of the enemy, it was

employed with equal effect, by sea and land, in battles or in sieges.1 It was
either

poured from the ramparts in large boilers, or launched in red-hot balls of
stone

and iron, or darted in arrows and javelins, twisted round with flax and tow,
which

had deeply imbibed the inflammable oil: sometimes it was deposited in fire-
ships,

the victims and instruments of a more ample revenge, and was most commonly

blown through long tubes of copper, which were planted on the prow of a galley

and fancifully shaped into the mouths of savage monsters, that seemed to vomit
a

stream of liquid and consuming fire. This important art was preserved at Con­

stantinople, as the palladium of the state; the galleys and artillery might
occa­

sionally be lent to the allies of Rome; but the composition of the Greek fire
was

concealed with the most jealous scruple, and the terror of the enemies was in­

creased and prolonged by their ignorance and surprise. In the treatise of the
ad­

ministration of the empire, the royal author(4) suggests the answers and
excuses

that might best elude the indiscreet curiosity and importunate demands of the
bar­

barians. They should be told that the mystery of the Greek fire had been re­

vealed by an angel to the first and greatest of the Constantines, with a
sacred in-,

junction, that this gift of heaven, this peculiar blessing of the Romans,
should

never be communicated to any foreign nation: that the prince and subject, were

alike bound to religious silence, under the temporal and spiritual penalties
of trea­

son and sacrilege; and that the impious attempt would provoke the sudden and
su­

pernatural vengeance of the God of the Christians. By these precautions, the
se­

cret was confined, above four hundred years, to the Romans of the east; and,
at

the end of the eleventh century, the Pisans, to whom every art was familiar,
suf­

fered the effects, without understanding the composition of the Greek fire. It
was

at length either discovered or stolen by the Mahometans; and, in the holy wars
of

Syria and Egypt, they retorted an invention, contrived against themselves, on
the

heads of the Christians. A knight, who despised the swords and lances of the

Saracens, relates, with heartfelt sincerity, his own fears, -and those of his
compa­

nions, at the sight and sound of the mischievous engine that discharged a
torrent

of the Greek fire, the feu Gregeois, as it is styled by the more early of the
French

writers. It came flying through the air, says Joinville,(5) like a winged
long-

tailed dragon, about the thickness of a hogshead, with the report of thunder,
and

the velocity of lightning; and the darkness of the night was dispelled by this
dead-

(1) The naptha. the oleum incendiarum of the history of Jerusalem,-Gest. Del
per Francos, p. 1167.) the ori-

-enud fountain of James de Vitry, lib. iii. c. 84.) is introduced on slight evidence and strong probability. Cin-  
namus (lib. vi. p. 163.) calls the Greek fire *rop MnJxov ; and the naptha is
known to abound between the Tigris

and the Caspian sea. According to Pliny, (Hist. Natur. 2.109.) it was
subservient to the revenge of Medea,

and in either etymology the (Xa.ov Mjifasf, or MVi<»s (Procop.de Bell. Gothic,
lib. iv. c. 11.) may fairly sig­

nify this liquid bitumen.

(2) On the different sorts of oils and bitumen, see Dr. Watson's (the present
bishop of LlandafT's) Chemical

Essays; vol. iii. essay 1. a classic book, the best adapted to infuse the
taste and knowledge of chemistry. The

less perfect idea of ihe ancients mny be found in Strabo (Geograpli. lib. xvi.
p. 1078.) and Pliny (Hist.Natur. 2.

108,109.) Huic (Naplbcz) magna cognatio est igniuro, transiliuntque protinus
in earn undecunque visam. Of

our travellers I om best pleased with Otter, (torn. 1. p. 153—158.)

(3) Anna Comnena has partly drawn aside the curtain. Am tv; jnvx»;, xxi u\hcav
tiw, tcoutmv Jvdpaw usi5x>.wv

trvfayi-r** SsxftuQv ocxa-jo-rov. Tcuto autw0£<cu rpiBoftiuov if*3xXKtTvt s<;
ow\«nwu« x»/.a««v x»( iftQuTxTtci mtftt to-j

5t*<o»tos u£f» x»i a-w/jtnxvivuzri. (Aleviad. lib. xiii. p. 383.) Elsewhere
(lib. si. p. 336.) she mentions the

property of burning, x«t* to jrpxvig xx» sp' nc»T«p*. Leo. in the nineteenth
chapter of his Tactics (Opera Meursii,

torn. vi. p. 834. edit. Lami, Florent. 1743.) speaks of the new invention of
srup /*et« i3eonT«; x«» xjctvou. These are

genuine and Imperial testimonies.

(4) Constantin. Porphyrogenit. de Administrat. Imperii, c. xiii. p. 64,65.

(5) Histoiie de St. Louis, p. 32. Paris, 1688. p. 44. Pari,, de I'lmprimerie
Royalc, 1761. The former of these

editions is precious fur the observations of Ducange; the latter for the pure
and original text of Joinville. We

must have recourse to that text fo discover, that the feu Gregeois was shot
with a pile or javelin, from an en­

gine that acted like a sling:

