OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

in the age of Job, the crime of impiety was punished by the Arabian magis­

trate;^) and Mahomet was guilty of deserting and denying the national deities.

But so loose was the policy of Mecca, that the leaders of the Koreish, instead
of

accusing a criminal, were compelled to employ the measures of persuasion or
vio­

lence. They repeatedly addressed Abu Taleb in the style of reproach and me­

nace. "Thy nephew reviles our religion; he accuses our wise forefathers of ig­

norance and folly, silence him quickly, lest he kindle tumult and discord in
the

city. If he persevere, we shall draw our swords against him and his adherents,

and thou wilt be responsible for theT)lood of thy fellow-citizens." The weight

and moderation of Abu Taleb eluded the violence of religious faction; the most

helpless or timid of the disciples retired to Ethiopia, and the prophet
withdrew

himself to various places of strength in the town and country. As he was still

supported by his family, the rest of the tribe of Koreish engaged themselves
to

renounce all intercourse with the children of Hashem, neither to buy nor sell,

neither to marry nor to give in marriage, but to pursue them with implacable
enmi­

ty, till they should deliver the person of Mahomet to the justice of the gods.
The

decree was suspended in the Caaba before the eyes of the nation; the
messengers

of the Koreish pursued the the Mussulman exiles in heart of Africa: they be­

sieged the prophet and his most faithful followers, intercepted their water,
and

inflamed their mutual animosity by the retaliation of injuries and insults.^ A

doubtful truce restored the appearances of concord, till the death of Abu
Taleb

abandoned Mahomet to the power of his enemies, at the moment when he was

deprived of his domestic comforts by the loss of his faithful and generous
Cadijah.

Abu Sophian, the chief of the branch of Ommiyah, succeeded to the principality

of the republic of Mecca. A zealous votary of the idols, a mortal foe of the
line

of Hashem, he convened an assembly of the Koreishites and their allies, to
decide

the fate of the apostle. His imprisonment might provoke the despair of his en­

thusiasm; and the exile of an eloquent and popular fanatic would diffuse the
mis­

chief through the provinces of Arabia. His death was resolved; and they agreed

that a sword from each tribe should be buried in his heart, to divide the
guilt of

his blood, and baffle the vengeance of the Hashemites. An angel or a spy re­

vealed their conspiracy; and flight was the only resource of Mahomet.(2) At
the

dead of night, accompanied by his friend Abubeker, he silently escaped from
his

house: the assassins watched at the door; but they were deceived by the figure
of

Ali, who reposed on the bed, and was covered with the green vestment of the
apos­

tle. The Koreish respected the piety of the heroic youth; but some verses of
Ali,

which are still extant, exhibit an interesting picture of his anxiety, his
tenderness,

and his religious confidence. Three days Mahomet and his companion were con­

cealed in the cave of Thor, at the distance of a league from Mecca; and in the

close of each evening, they received from the son and daughter of Abubeker, a

secret supply of intelligence and food. The diligence of the Koreish explored

every haunt in the neighbourhood of the city; they arrived at the entrance of
the

cavern; but the providential deceit of a spider's web and a pigeon's nest, is
sup­

posed to convince them that the place was solitary and inviolate. " We are
only

two," said the trembling Abubeker. " There is a third," replied the prophet;

" it is God himself." No sooner was the pursuit abated, than the two fugitives

issued from the rock, and mounted their camels: on the road to Medina, they
were

overtaken by the emissaries of the Koreish; they redeemed themselves with

prayers and promises from their hands. In this eventful moment the lance of an

Arab might have changed the history of the world. The flight of the prophet

from Mecca to Medina has fixed the memorable era of the Hegira,(S) which, at

the end of twelve centuries, still discriminates the lunar years of the
Mahometan

nations. (4)

The religion of the Koran might have perished in its cradle, had not Medina

embraced with faith and reverence the holy outcasts of Mecca. Medina, or the

(1) In the time of Job, the crime of impiety was punished by the Arabian
magistrate, (c. 13. v. 26—38.) I

blush for a respectable prelate, (de Poesi Hebraeorum, p. 650, 651. edit.
Michaelis; and a letter of a late profes­

sor in the university of Oxford, p. 15—53.) who justifies and applauds this
patriarchal inquisition.

(2) TVHerbelot. Bibliot. Orient, p. 445. He quotes a particular history of the
flight of Mahomet.

(3) The Hegrra was instituted by Omar, the second caliph, in imitation of the
era of the martyrs of the

Christians (d*Herbelot, p. 444.:) and properly commenced sixty-tight days
before the flight of Mahomet, with

the first of Moharren, or first day of the Arabian year, which coincides with
Friday, July 16, A. D. 622. (Abul­

feda, Vit. Moham. c. xxii. xxiii. p. 45—50. and Greave's edition of Ullug
Beig's Epochs: Arabum, &c. c. i. p. 8,

10. fcc.)

(4) Mahomet's life, from his mission to the Hegira, may be found in Abulfeda
(p. 14—45.) and Gagnier (tom-

i. 134—251.542-383.) The legeud from p. 187-334. is vouched by Al .lannabi and
disdained by Abulfeda.

