OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, SIX

generosity and valour was the darling theme of their song; and when they
pointed

their keenest satire against a despicable race, they affirmed, in the
bitterness of

reproach, that the men knew not how to give, nor the women to deny.(l) The

same hospitality, which was practised by Abraham and celebrated by Homer, is

still renewed in the camps of the Arabs. The ferocious Bedoweens, the terror
of

the desert, embrace, without inquiry or hesitation, the stranger who dares to
con­

fide in their honour and to enter their tent. His treatment is kind and
respectful;

he shares the wealth or the poverty of his host: and, after a needful repose,
he is

dismissed on his way, with thanks, with blessings, and perhaps with gifts. The

heart and hand are more largely expanded by the wants of a brother or a
friendj

but the heroic acts that could deserve the public applause, must have
surpassed

the narrow measure of discretion and 'experience. A dispute had arisen, who

among the citizens of Mecca, was entitled to the prize of generosity, and a
suc­

cessive application was made to the three who were deemed most worthy of the

trial, Abdallah, the son of Abbas, had undertaken a distant journey, and his
foot

was in the stirrup when he heard the voice of a suppliant:—"O son of the uncle

of the apostle of God, I am a traveller and in distress!" He instantly
dismounted

to present the pilgrim with his camel, her rich caparison, and a purse of four
thou­

sand pieces of gold, excepting only the sword, either for its intrinsic value,
or as

the gift of an honoured kinsman. The servant of Kais informed the second sup-

pliant that his master was asleep; but he immediately added, "Here is a purse
of

seven thousand pieces of gold (it is all we have in the house,) and here is an
order,

that will entitle you to a camel and a slave:" the master, as soon as he
awoke,

praised and enfranchised his faithful steward, with a gentle reproof, that, by
re­

specting his slumbers, he had stinted his bounty. The third of these heroes,
the

blind Arabah, at the hour of prayer, was supporting his steps on the shoulders
of

two slaves. "Alas!" he replied, " my coffers are empty! but these you may
sell: if

you refuse, I renounce them." At these words, pushing away the youths, he

groped along the wall with his staff. The character of Hatem is the perfect
model

of Arabian virtue:(2) he was brave and liberal, an eloquent poet and a
successful

robber: forty camels were roasted at his hospitable feast; and at the prayer
of a

suppliant enemy, he restored both the captives and the spoil. The freedom of
his

countrymen disdained^he laws of justice: thqy proudly indulged the spontaneous

impulse of pity and benevolence.

The religion of the Arabs,(3) as well as of the Indians, consisted in the
worship

of the sun, the moon, and the fixed stars, a primitive and specious mode of
super­

stition. The bright luminaries of the skv display the visible image of a
deity: their

number and distance convey to a philosophic, or even a vulgar eye, the idea of
a

boundless space; the character of eternity is marked on these solid globes,
that

seem incapable of corruption or decay; the regularity of their motions may bfr

ascribed to a principle of reason or instinct; and their real or imaginary
influence

encourages the vain belief that the earth and its inhabitants are the object
of their

peculiar care. The science of astronomy was cultivated at Babvlon; but the
school

of the Arabs was a clear firmament and a naked plain. In the nocturnal
marches,,

they steered by the guidance of the stars: their names, and order, and daily
station,

were familiar to the curiosity and devotion of the Bedoween; and he was taught
by

experience to divide in twenty-eight parts, the zodiac of the moon, and to
bless-

the constellations who refreshed, with salutary rains, the thirst of the
desert. The

reign of the heavenly orbs could not be extended beyond the visible sphere;
and

some metaphysical powers were necessary to sustain the transmigration of souls

and the resurrection of bodies: a camel was left to perish on the grave, that
he

might serve his master in another life; and the invocation of departed spirits
im­

plies that they were still endowed with consciousness and power. I am
ignorant,

and I am careless of the blind mythology of the barbarians; of the local
deities, of

the stars, the air, and the earth, of their sex or titles, their attributes or
subordi­

nation. Each tribe, each family, each independent warrior, created and changed

the rites and the object of his fantastic worship; but the nation, in every
age, has

bowed to the religion, as well as to the language, of Mecca. The genuine
antiquity of

(1) Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 29.30.

(2) D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 458. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii.
p. 118. Caab and Hesnus (Po-

cock, Specimen, p. 43. 48. 48.) were likewise conspicuous for their
liberality; and the latter is elegantly praised

by an Arabian poet:—" Videbis eum cum accessens t?xultantem, ac si dares illi
quod ab illo petis."

(3) Whatever can be known of the idolatry of the ancient Arabians, may be
found in Pocock, (Specimen,p.

89—136. 153,164.) His profound erudition'is more clearly and concisely
interpreted by Sale; (Preliminary

Discourse, p. 14—24,) and Assemanni (Mibltot. Orient, torn. iv. p. 580 — 598.)
has added some valuable remarks

