10 THE DECLINE AND FALL t

band, who, in the room of a theatrical prostitute, might have selected the
purest

and most noble virgin of the cast.(l)

II. A material difference may be observed in the games of antiquity; the most

eminent of the Greeks were actors, the Romans were merely spectators. The

Olympic stadium was open to wealth, merit, and ambition; and if the candidates

could depend on their personal skill and activity, they might pursue the
footsteps

of Diomede and Menelaus, and conduct their own horses in the rapid career. (2)

Ten, twenty, forty chariots were allowed to start at the same instant; a crown
of

leaves was the reward of the victor; and his fame, with that of his family and

country, was chanted in lyric strains more durable than monuments of brass and

marble. But a senator, or even a citizen, conscious of his dignity, would have

blushed to expose his person or his horses in the circus of Rome. The games

were exhibited at the expense of the republic, the magistrates, or the
emperors;

but the reins were abandoned to servile hands; and if the profits of a
favourite

charioteer sometimes exceeded those of an advocate, they must be considered as

the effects of popular extravagance, and the high wages of a disgraceful
profes­

sion. The race, in its first institution, was a simple contest of two
chariots, whose

drivers were distinguished by white and red liveries; two additional colours a
light

green, and a cerulean blue, were afterward introduced; and as the races were
re­

peated twenty-five times, one hundred chariots contributed in the same day to

the pomp of the circus. The four factions soon acquired a legal establishment,

and a mysterious origin, and their fanciful colours were derived from the
various

appearances of nature in the four seasons of the year; the red dog-star of
summer,

the snows of winter, the deep shades of autumn, and the cheerful verdure of
the

spring. (3) Another interpretation preferred the elements to the seasons, and
the

struggle of the green and blue was supposed to represent the conflict of the
earth

and sea. Their respective victories announced either a plentiful harvest, or a

prosperous navigation, and the hostility of the husbandmen and mariners was

somewhat less absurd than the blind ardour of the Roman people, who devoted

their lives and fortunes to the colour which they espoused. Such folly was
dis­

dained and indulged by the wisest princes; but the names of Caligula, Nero,
Vi-

tellius, Verus, Commodus, Caracaila, and Elagabalus, were enrolled in the
blue,

or green factions of the circus; they frequented their stables, applauded
their fa­

vourites, chastised their antagonists, and deserved the esteem of the
populace, by

the natural or affected imitation of their manners. The bloody and tumultuous

contest continued to disturb the public festivity, till the last age of the
spectacles

of Rome; and Theodoric, from a motive of justice or affection, interposed his
au­

thority to protect the greens against the violence of a consul and a
patrician, who

were passionately addicted to the blue faction of the circus. (4)

Constantinople adopted the follies, though not the virtues of ancient Rome;
and

the same factions which had agitated the circus, raged with redoubled fury in
the

hippodrome. Under the reign of Anastasius, this popular phrenzy was inflamed

by religious zeal: and the greens, who had treacherously concealed stones and

daggers under baskets of fruit, massacred, at a solemn festival, three
thousand of

their blue adversaries. (5) From the capital this pestilence was diffused into
the

provinces and cities of the east, and the sportive distinction of two colours
pro­

duced two strong and irreconcilable factions, which shook the foundations of a

feeble government. (6) The popular dissensions, founded on the most serious
in­

terest, or holy pretence, have scarcely equalled the obstinacy of this wanton
dis­

cord, which invaded the peace of families, divided friends and brothers, and

(1) Ai she persecuted the popei, and rejected a council, Bamnius exhausts the
names of Ere, Dalila, Hero*

dias, &c, after which he has recourse to his infernal dictionary; civis
inferni—alumna da-monura—aatanico

agitata spiritu—Kstro percita diabolico, 8c c. &c. (A. D. 548. No. 24.)

f2) Read and feel the twenty-third hook of the Iliad, a living picture of
manners, passions, and the whole

form and spirit of the chariot-race. West's Dissertation on the Olympic Games,
(sect. aii. 17.) affords much

curiocs and authentic information.

(3) The four colours,aibati, ruMnti,pnwnu veneti, represent the four seasons,
according to Cassiodorus

(Var. hi. 51.) who lavishes much wit and eloquence on this theatrical mystery.
Of these colours, the three

first may be fairly translated, whtie, rev/, and green* Venetus is explained
by eteruleus, a word various and

vague: it is properly the sky reflected in the sea; but custom and convenience
may allow blue as an equivalent

(Robert Stephan. sub voce. Spence's Polymetis, p. 228.)

(4) See Onuphrius Panvinsns de Ludis Ctrcensibus, lib. i. c. 10, II. the
seventeenth Annotation on Mascou's

History of the Germans, and Aleman. ad c. 7.

(5) Marcellin. in Chron. p. 47. Instead of the vulgar word Mrtero, he nses the
more exquisite terms of ctcru-

lea and carealit. Baronius (A. D. 501. No. iv. o.) is satisfied that the blues
were orthodox; but Tillemont is

angry at the supposition, and will not allow any ntartyrs in a playhouse.
(Hist, des Emp. torn. vi. p. 554.)

(6) See Procopius, Persic lib. i. c. 24. In describing the vices of the
factions and of the government, the

public is not more favourable than the secret historian. Aleman. (p. 26.) has
quoted a fine passage from Gre­

gory Nazianzen, which proves the inveteracy of the evil.

