OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

the shares of guilt or virtue shall preponderate, the sentence will be
pronounced,

and all, without distinction, will pass over the sharp and perilous bridge of
the

abyss: but the innocent, treading in the footsteps of Mahomet, will gloriously
enter

the gates of paradise, while the guilty will falUinto the first and mildest of
the

seven hells. The term of expiation will vary from nine hundred to seven thou­

sand years; but the prophet has judiciously promised, that all his disciples,
what­

ever may be their sins, shall be saved, by their own faith and his
intercession, from

eternal damnation. It is not surprising that superstition should act most
power­

fully on the fears of her votaries, since the human fancy can paint with more
ener­

gy the misery than the bliss of a future life. With the simple elements of
dark­

ness and fire, we create a sensation of pain, which may be aggravated to an
infi­

nite degree by the idea of endless duration. But the same idea operates with
an

opposite effect on the continuity of pleasure; and too much of our present
enjoy­

ments is obtained from the relief, or the comparison of evil. It is natural
enough

that an Arabian prophet should dwell with rapture on the groves,
the.fountains,

and the rivers of paradise; but instead of inspiring the blessed inhabitants
with a

liberal taste for harmony and science, conversation and friendship, he idly
cele­

brates the pearls and diamonds, the robes of silk, palaces of marble, dishes
of

gold, rich wines, artificial dainties, numerous attendants, and the whole
train of

sensual and costly luxury, which becomes insipid to the owner, even in the
short

eriod of this mortal life. Seventy-two houris, or black-eyed girls, of
resplendent

eauty, blooming youth, virgin purity, and exquisite sensibility, will be
created

for the use of the meanest believer; a moment of pleasure will be prolonged to
a

thousand years, and his faculties will be increased a hundred-fold, to render
him

worthy of his felicity. Notwithstanding a vulgar prejudice, the gates of
heaven

will be open to both sexes; but Mahomet has not specified the male companions
of

the female elect, lest he should either alarm the jealousy of their former
hus­

bands, orUisturb their felicity, by the suspicion of an everlasting marriage.
This

image of a carnal paradise has provoked the indignation, perhaps the envy of
the

monks: they declaim against the impure religion of Mahomet; and his modest

apologists are driven to the poor excuse of figures and allegories. But the
sounder

and more consistent party adhere, without shame, to the literal interpretation
of

the Koran: useless would be the resurrection of the body, unless it were
restored

to the possession and exercise of its worthiest faculties; and the union of
sensual

and intellectual enjoyment is requisite to complete the happiness of the
double ani­

mal, the perfect man. Yet the joys of the Mahometan paradise will not be con­

fined to the indulgence of luxury and appetite; and the prophet has expressly
de­

clared, that all meaner happiness will be forgotten and despised by the saints
and

martyrs, who shall be admitted to the beatitude of the divine visioh.(l)

The first and most arduous conquests of Mahomet(2) were those of his wife,

his servant, his pupil, and his friend;(3) since he presented himself as a
prophet

to those who were most conversant with his infirmities as a man. Yet Cadijah

believed the weirds, and cherished the glory, of her husband; the obsequious
and

(1) For the day ofjudgment, hell, paradise, Sec. consult the Koran, (c. 2. v.
25. e. 56. 78, &c.) with Maracci's

virulent, but learned, refutation, (mnis notes, and in the Prodromus, part 4.
p. 78.-120. 122, &e.)trTleil»e]ot,

(Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 308, 37f.) Reland, (p. -47—61.) and Sale, (p.
76—103.) The original ideas of the

Magi are darkly and doubtfully explored by their apologist. Dr. Hyde. (Hist.
Religicnis Persarum, c. 32. p.

■402—412. Oxon. 1716.) Ill the article of Mahomet, Bayle has shown how
indifferently wit and philosophy sup­

ply the absence of general information.

(2) Before I enter into the history of the prophet, it is incumbent on me to
produce my evidence. The La­

tin, French and English versions of the Koran, are preceded by historical
discourses, ami tin* three translators,

Maracci, (torn. i. p. 10—32.) Savary, (torn. i. p. 1—248.) and Sale,
(Preliminary Discourse, p. 33—56.) had accu­

rately studied the language and character of their author. Two professed lives
of Mahomet have been com­

posed by Dr. Prideaux (Life of Mahomet, seventh edition, London, 1718, in
octavo) and the count de Boulain-

villiers (Vie de Mahomet, Londres, 1730, in octavo;) but the adverse wish of
finding an impostor, or a hero, has

too often corrupted the learning of the doctor and the ingenuity of the count.
The article in d'Herbelot (Bi-

bliot. Orient, p. 598—603.) is chiefly drawn from Novairi and Mircond; but the
best and most authentic of our

guides is M. Gagnier, a Frenchman by birth, and professor at Oxford, of the
oriental tongues. In two elabo­

rate works, (Ismael Abulfeda de Vita et Rebus gestis Mohammetlis, 8tc. Latine
vertit, Prtefatione et Notis il-

, lustravit Johannes Gagnier, Oxon. 1723, in folio; La vie de Mahomet traduite
et compilee de PAIcoran, drs

Traditions authentiques de la Sonna et des meiliears Auteurs A rabes;
Amsterdam, 1748.3 vols, in duodecimo)

he has interpreted, illustrated, and supplied the Arabic text of Abulfeda and
Al Jannabi, the first, and enlight­

ened prince, who reigned at Hainan,in Syria, A. D. 1310—1332; (see Gagnier
Prsefat. ad Abulfed.) the second,

a credulous doctor, who visited Mecca, A. D. 1556. (D. Herbelot, p. 397.
Gagnier, torn. iii. p. 209,210.) These

are my general vouchers, and the inquisitive reader may follow the order of
time, and the division of chapters,

-yet X must observe, that both Abulfeda and Al Jannabi are modern historians, and that they cannot appeal to  
any writers of the first century of the Hegira.

(3) After the Greeks, Prideaux (p. 8.) discloses the secret doubts of the wife
of Mahomet. As if he had been

a privy-counsellor of the prophet, Botilainvilliers (p. 272, &c.) unfolds the
sublime and patriotic views ol'Cadi-

Jats and the first disciples.

