108 THE DECLINE AND FALL

}'o; and Teias was unanimously chosen to succeed and revenge their departed
hero.

The new king immediately sent ambassadors to implore, or rather to purchase,

the aid of the Franks, and nobly lavished, for the public safety, the riches
which

had been deposited in the palace of Pavia. The residue of the royal treasure
was

guarded by his brother Aligern at Cumx in Campania; but the strong castle
which

Totila had fortified, was closely besieged by the arms of Narses. From the
Alps

to the foot of mount Vesuvius, the Gothic king, by rapid and secret marches,
ad­

vanced to the relief of his brother, eluded the vigilance of the Roman chiefs,
and

pitched his camp on the banks of the Sarnus or Draco,{l) which flows from Nu-

ceria into the bay of Naples. The river separated the two armies: sixty days

were consumed in distant and fruitless combats, and Teias maintained this
impor­

tant post, till he was deserted by his fleet and the hope of subsistence. With
re­

luctant steps he ascended the Lactarian mount, where the physicians of Rome,

since the time of Galen, had sent their patients for the benefit of the air
and the

milk. (2) But the Goths soon embraced a more'generous resolution; to descend

the hill, to dismiss their horses, and to die in arms, and in the possession
of free­

dom. The king marched at their head, bearing in his right hand a lance, and an

ample buckler in his left: with the one he struck dead the foremost of the
assail­

ants; with the other he received the weapons which every hand was ambitious to

aim against his life. After a combat of many hours, his left arm was fatigued
by

the weight of twelve javelins which hung from his shield. Without moving from

his ground, or suspending his blows, the hero called aloud on his attendants
for a

fresh buckler, but in the moment, while his side was uncovered, it was pierced
by

a mortal dart. He fell: and his head, exalted on a spear, proclaimed to the
na­

tions, that the Gothic kingdom was no more. But the example of his death
served

only to animate the companions who had sworn to perish with their leader. They

fought till darkness descended on the earth. They reposed on their arms. The

combat was renewed with the return of light, and maintained with unabated
vigour

till the evening of the second day. The repose of a second night, the want of
wa­

ter, and the loss of their bravest champions, determined the surviving Goths
to

accept the fair capitulation which the prudence of Narses was inclined to
propose.

They embraced the alternative of residing in Italy as the subjects and
soldiers of

Justinian, or departing with a portion of their private wealth, in search of
some

independent country. (3) Yet the oath of fidelity or exile was alike rejected
by one

thousand Goths, who broke away before the treaty was signed, and boldly
effect­

ed their retreat to the walls of Pavia. The spirit, as well as the situation,
of Ali­

gern, prompted him to imitate rather than to bewail, his brother; a strong and

dexterous archer, he transpierced with a single arrow the armour and breast of

his antagonist; and his military conduct defended Cuma;(4) above a year
against

the forces of the Romans. Their industry had scooped the Sibyl's cave(5) into
a

prodigious mine; combustible materials were introduced to consume the
temporary

props: the wall and the gate of Cumic sunk into the cavern, but the ruins
formed

a deep and inaccessible precipice. On the fragment of a rock, Aligern stood
alone

and unshaken, till he calmly surveyed the hopeless condition of his country,
and

judged it more honourable to be the friend of Narses than the slave of the
Franks.

After the death of Teias, the Roman general separated his troops to reduce the

cities of Italy; Lucca sustained a long and vigorous siege: and such was the
humani­

ty or the prudence of Narses, that the repeated perfidy of the inhabitants
could

not prov okc him to exact the forfeit lives of their hostages. These hostages
were

(1) Tlie bpx*vv of Prncopius (Goth. lib. iv. e. 35.) is evidently the Samus.
The text it accused or altered

by the rash violence of Cldveritis (lib. iv. c. 3. p. 1156.:) but Caraillo
Pellegrini of Naples (Discorsi sopra la

Campanm, Felice, p. 330.331.) has proved from old records, that as early as
the year 822 that river was called

the Drucontio, or Draconcello.

(2) Galen (de Method. Medendi, lib. v. apud CIsiver. lib. iv. c. 3. p. 1159,
1160.) describes the lofty site, pure

air, and rich milk of mount Lactarius, whose medicinal benefits were equally
known and sought in the time of'

Syrnmnchus (lib. vi. epist. 18, and Cassiodorus Var. xi. 10.) Nothing; is now
left except the name of the town

of Lettere.

(3) Buat (torn. xi. p. 2, fcc.) conveys to his favourite Pavavia this remnant
of Gotht, who by others are bu­

ried in the mountains of Uri,or restored to their native isle of Gothland
(Mascou, Annot. 21.)

(4) I leave Scaliger (Animadvrrs. in Euseb. p. 59.) and Salmasius (Exercitat.
Plinuro, p. 51,52.) to quarrel

about the origin of dims, the oldest of the Greek colonies in Italy. (Strab.
lib. v. p. 372. Velleius Paterculaf

lib. i. c. 4.,) already vacant in .luvenal's time, (Satir. 3.,) and now in
ruins.

(5) Arathias (lib. i. c. 21.) settles the Sibyl's cave under the waits of
Cumae: he a (Trees with Servius (ad lib. 6.

/Sneid.:) nor can I perceive why their opinion should be rejected by Hevne.
the excellent editor of Virjjil (torn,

ii. p. 650,651.) In urbe media secreta religio! But Cunue was not yet built;
and the lines (lib. vi. 98, 97.)

would become ridiculous, if iEnens were actually in a Greek city.

