OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 101

tila with an insulting smile, " your pride now condescends to become a
suppliant."

"I am a suppliant," replied the prudent archdeacon: " God has now made us your

subjects, and as your subjects we are entitled to your clemency." At this
humble

prayer, the lives of the Romans were spared; and the chastity of the maids and

matrons was preserved inviolate from the passions of the hungry soldiers. But

they were rewarded by the freedom of pillage, after the most precious spoils
had

been reserved for the royal treasury. The nouses of the senators were
plentifully

stored with gold and silver; and the avarice of Bessas had laboured with so
much

guilt and shame for the benefit of the conqueror. In this revolution, the sons
and

daughters of Roman consuls tasted the misery which they had spurned or
relieved,

"wandered in tattered garments through the streets of the city, and begged
their

bread, perhaps without success, before the gates of their hereditary mansions.
The

riches of Rusticiana, the daughter of Symmachus and widow of Boethius, had

been generously devoted to alleviate the calamities of famine. But the
barbarians

were exasperated by the report, that she had prompted the people to overthrow

the statues of the great Theodoric; and the life of that venerable matron
would

have been sacrificed to his memory, if Totila had not respected her birth, her

virtues, and even the pious motive of her revenge. The next day he pronounced

two orations, to congratulate and admonish his victorious Goths, and reproach
the

senate, as the vilest of slaves, with their perjury, folly, and ingratitude;
sternly

declaring, that their estates and honours were justly forfeited to the
companions

of his arms. Yet he consented to forgive their revolt, and the senators repaid
his

clemency by despatching circular letters to their tenants and vassals in the
pro­

vinces of Italy, strictly to enjoin them to desert the standard of the Greeks,
to cul-'

tivate their lands in peace, and to learn from their masters the duty of
obedience

to a Gothic sovereign. Against the cities which had so long delayed the course

of his victories he appeared inexorable: one-third of the walls, in different
parts,

■were demolished by his command; fire and engines prepared to consume or sub­

vert, the most stately works of antiquity: and the world was astonished by the
fa­

tal decree, that Rome should be changed into a pasture for cattle. The firm
and

temperate remonstrance of Belisarius suspended the execution; he warned the

barbarian not to sully his fame by the destruction of those monuments, which
were

the glory of the dead, and the delight of the living; and Totila was
persuaded,

by the advice of an enemy, to preserve Rome as the ornament of his kingdom, or

the fairest pledge of peace and reconciliation. When he had signified to the
am­

bassadors of Belisarius, his intention of sparing the city, he stationed an
army at

the distance of one hundred and twenty furlongs, to observe the motions of the
Ro­

man general. With the remainder of his forces, he marched into Lucania and

Apulia, and occupied, on the summit of mount Garganus.(l) one of the camps of

Hannibal. (2) The senators were dragged in his train, and afterwards confined
in

the fortresses of Campania: the citizens, with their wives and children, were
dis­

persed in exile; and during forty days Rome was abandoned to desolate and
dreary

solitude. (3)

The loss of Rome was speedily retrieved by an action, to which, according to
the

event, the public opinion would apply the names of rashness or heroism. After

the departure of Totila, the Roman general sallied from the port at the head
of a

thousand horse, cut in pieces the enemy who opposed his progress, and visited
with

pity and reverence the vacant space of the eternal city. Resolved to maintain
a

station so conspicuous in the eyes of mankind, he summoned the greatest part
of his

troops to the standard which he erected on the capital: the old inhabitants
were

recalled by the love of their country and the hopes of food; and the keys of
Rome

were sent a second time to the emperor Justinian. The walls, as far as they
had

been demolished by the Goths, were repaired with rude and dissimilar
materials;

the ditch was restored; iron spikes(4) were profusely scattered in the
highways

(1) Mount Garganns, now Monte St. Angelo,in tlie kingdom of Naples, runs three
hundred stadia into the

Adriatic sea (Strab. lib. vi. p. 436.,) and in the darker ages, was
illustrated by the apparition, miracles, and

church of St. Michael the archangel. Horace, a native of Apulia or Lucania,
had seen the elms and oaks of

Garganus labouring and bellowing with the north wind that blew on that lofty
coast (Carol, ii. 9. Epist.

ii. 1.301.} ,

(2) I cannot ascertain this particular camp of Hannibal: but the Funic
quarters were long and often in the

neighbourhood of Arpi (T. Liv. xxii. 9.12. 24. 3, &c.)

(3) Totila .... Romam ingreditur ac evertit mnros domos aliquantas igni
comburens, ae omnes

Romanorum res in proedam accepit, hos ipsos Romanns in Campaniam captivos
abduxit. Post quam devasta-

tionem.xl autampHus dies, Rama fuit ita desolala, ut nemo ibi hominum,nisi
(nulla?) bestise raorarentur

(Marcellin.in Chron. p. 54.)

(4) The tribuli are small engines with four spikes, one fixed in the ground,
the three others erect or adverse

