Ot THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 69

hiid threatened her life. Photius was more resolved to punish, and less prompt

to pardon: he flew to Ephesus; extorted from a trusty eunuch of his mother the

full confession of her guilt; arrested Theodosius and his treasures in the
church of

St. John the apostle, and concealed his captives, whose execution was only de­

layed, in a secure and sequestered fortress of Cilicia. Such a daring outrage
against

public justice could not pass with impunity; and the cause of Antonina was
espoused

by the empress, whose favour she had deserved by the recent services of the
dis­

grace of a prefect, and the exile and murder of a pope. At the end of the cam­

paign, Belisarius was recalled; he complied, as usual, with the imperial
mandate.

His mind was not prepared for rebellion; his obedience, however adverse to the
dic­

tates of honour, was consonant to the wishes of his heart; and when he
embraced his

■wife, at the command, and perhaps in the presence, of the empress, the tender
hus­

band was disposed to forgive, or to be forgiven. The bounty of Theodora
reserved

for her companion a more precious favour. " I have found (she said,) my
dearest

patrician, a pearl of inestimable value; it has not yet been viewed by any
mortal

eye; but the sight and the possession of this jewel are destined for my
friend." As

soon as the curiosity and impatience of Antonina were kindled, the door of a
bed­

chamber was thrown open, and she beheld her lover, whom the diligence of the

eunuchs had discovered in his secret prison. Her silent wonder burst into pas­

sionate exclamations of gratitude and joy, and she named Theodora her queen,
her

benefactress, and her saviour. The monk of Ephesus was nourished in the pa­

lace with luxury and ambition; but, instead of assuming, as he was promised,
the

command of the Roman armies, Theodosius expired in the first fatigues of an
amo­

rous interview. The grief of Antonina could only be assuaged by the sufferings
of

her son. A youth of consular rank, and sickly constitution, was punished,
without

a trial, like a malefactor and a slave: yet such was the constancy of his
mind, that

Photius sustained the tortures of the scourge and the rack, without violating
the

faith which he had sworn to Belisarius. After this fruitless cruelty, the son
of An­

tonina, while his mother feasted with the empress, was buried in her
subterraneous

prisons, which admitted not the distinction of night and day. He twice escaped

to the venerable sanctuaries of Constantinople, the churches of St. Sophia and
of

the Virgin: but his tyrants were as insensible of religion as of pity; and the
helpless

youth, amidst the clamours of the clergy and people, was twice dragged from
the

altar to the dungeon. His third attempt was more successful. At the end of
three

years, the prophet Zacharia, or some mortal friend, indicated the means of an
es­

cape; he eluded the spies and guards of the empress, reached the holy
sepulchre

of Jerusalem, embraced the profession of a monk; and the abbot Photius was em­

ployed, after the death of Justinian, to reconcile and regulate the churches
of Egypt.

The son of Antonina suffered all that an enemy can inflict: her patient
husband

imposed on himself the more exquisite misery of violating his promise and
desert­

ing his friend.

In the succeeding campaign, Belisarius was again sent against the Persians; he

saved the east, but he oftended Theodora, and perhaps the emperor himself. The

malady of Justinian had countenanced the rumour of his death: and the Roman
ge^-

neral, on the supposition of that probable event, spoke the free language of a
citizen

and a soldier. His colleague Buzes, who concurred in the same sentiments, lost
his/

rank, his liberty, and his health, by the persecution of the empress: but the
dis­

grace o? Belisarius was alleviated by the dignity of his own character, and
the in--

Huence of his wife, who might wish to humble, but could not desire to ruin,
the

partner of her fortunes. Even this removal was coloured by the assurance, that

the sinking state of Italy would be retrieved by the single presence of the
conquer­

or. Bjit no sooner had he returned, alone and defenceless, than a hostile
commis--

sion was sent to the east, to seize his treasures and criminate his actions:
the guards

and veterans, who followed his private banner, were distributed among the
chiefs

of the army, and even the eunuchs presumed to cast lots for the partition of
his

martial domestics. When he passed with a small and sordid retinue through the

streets of Constantinople, his forlorn appearance extited the amazement and
com­

passion of the people. Justinian and Theodora received him with cold
ingratitude;

the servile crowd, with insolence and contempt; and in the evening he retired
with

trembling steps to his deserted palace. An indisposition, feigned or real, had
con^

fined Antonina to her apartment; and she walked disdainfully silent in the
adjacent

portico, while Belisarius threw himself on his bed, and expected, in an agony
of

grief and terror, the death which he had so often braved under the walls of
Rome.

Long after sunset a messenger was announced from the empress; he opened with

