66 THE DECLINE AND FALL

venna, if Belisarius would disclaim the authority of a master, accept the
choree

of the Goths, and assume, as he had deserved, the kingdom of Italy- If the
false

lustre of a diadem could have tempted the loyalty of a faithful subject, his
pru­

dence must have foreseen the inconstancy of the barbarians, and his rational
am­

bition would prefer the safe and honourable station of a Roman general. Even

the patience and seeming satisfaction with which he entertained a proposal of
trea­

son, might be susceptible of a malignant interpretation. But the lieutenant of

Justinian was conscious of his own rectitude: he entered into a dark and
crooked

path, as it might lead to the voluntary submission of the Goths;, and his
dexterous

policy persuaded them that he was disposed to comply with their wishes,
without

engaging an oath or a promise for the performance of a treaty which he
secretly

abhorred. The day of the surrender of Ravenna was stipulated by the Gothic

ambassadors: a fleet, laden with provisions, sailed as a welcome guest into
the

deepest recess of the.harbour: the gates were opened to the fancied king of
Italy;

and Belisarius, without meeting an enemy, triumphantly marched through the

streets of an impregnable city.(l) The Romans were astonished by their suc­

cess; the multitude of tall and robust barbarians were confounded by the image
of

their own patience; and the masculine females, spitting in the faces of their
sons

and husbands, most bitterly reproached them for betraying their dominion and

freedom to these pigmies of the south, contemptible in their numbers,
diminutive

in their stature. Before the Goths could recover from their first surprise,
and claim

the accomplishment of their doubtful hopes, the victor established his power
in

Ravenna, beyond the danger of repentance and revolt. Vitiges, who perhaps had

attempted to escape, was honourably guarded in his palace;(2) the flower of
the

Gothic youth was selected for the service of the emperor; the remainder of the

people was dismissed to their peaceful habitations in the southern provinces;
and a

colony of Italians was invited to replenish the depopulated city. The
submission

of the capital was imitated in the towns and villages of Italy, which had not
been

subdued, or even visited, by the Romans; and the independent Goths, who re­

mained in arms at Pavia and Verona, were ambitious only to become the subjects

of Belisarius. But his inflexible loyalty rejected, except as the substitute
of Jus­

tinian, their oaths of allegiance; and he was not offended by the reproach of
their

deputies, that he rather chose to be a slave than a king.

After the second victory of Belisarius, envy again whispered, Justinian
listened,

and the hero was recalled. *' The remnant of the Gothic war was no longer wor­

thy of his presence: agracioussovereign was impatient to reward his services,
and

to consult his wisdom: and he alone was capable of defending the east against
the

innumerable armies of Persia." Belisarius understood the suspicion, accepted
the

excuse, embarked at Ravenna his spoils and trophies; and proved, by his ready

obedience, that such an abrupt removal from the government of Italy was not
less

unjust than it might have been indiscreet. The emperor received, with honoura­

ble courtesy, both Vitiges and his more noble consort: and as the king of the
Goths

conformed to the Athanasian faith, he obtained, with a rich inheritance of
lands

in Asia, the rank of senator and patrician. (3) Every spectator admired,
without

peril, the strength and stature of the young barbarians: they adored the
strength

and majesty of the throne, and promised to shed their blood in the service of
their

benefactor. Justinian deposited in the Byzantine palace the treasures of the
Go­

thic monarchy. A flattering senate was sometimes admitted to gaze on the mag­

nificent spectacle; but it was enviously secluded from the public view; and
the

conqueror of Italy renounced, without a murmur, perhaps without a sigh, the
well-

earned honours of a second triumph. His glory was indeed exalted above all ex­

ternal pomp; and the faint and hollow praises of the court were supplied, even
in

a servile age, by the respect and admiration of his country. Whenever he ap­

peared in the streets and public places of Constantinople, Belisarius
attracted and

satisfied the eyes of the people. His lofty stature and majestic countenance
ful­

fil Ravenna was taken, not in the 540, but in Ike latter end of 539; and Pagi
(torn. ii. p. 560.) is rectified by

Murafon (Annali d'llala, torn. \: p. 62..) who piorei from an original act on
papyrus (Antiquit Italia; Medii

#>i) torn. n.dissert. 32. p.999-1007. Maffei.lstoria Diplomat, p. 15J—160.,)
that before the 3d of January,

540, peace and free correspondence were restored between Ravenna and Faenza.

(!) He was seized by John the Sanguinary, but an oath or sacrament was pledged
for his safety in the Basi­

lica Jnln (Hist. Miscell. lib. xvn.in Muraton, torn. i. p. 107.) Anastasiiis
(in Vit. Pont. p. 40.) gives a dark but

probable account. Monlfaucon is quoted by Mascon (Hist, of the Germans, 12.
21.) for a volive shield repre­

senting the captivity of Vitiges, and now in the collection of Signer I.andi
at Rome.

(3) Vitiges lived two years at Constantinople, and imperatoris in nifectu
eonvictiu (or conjunctus) rebus ex-

cesut'humanu. His widow, Matliruuenta, the wife and mother of the patricians,
the elder and younger Ger-

manuj, untied the su-eams of Alucian and Araali blood (Jomandes, c lx, p. 211,
in Muratori, torn. i.)

