THE DECLINE AND FALL

though it consisted of fewer men, could produce more soldiers than the
unwieldy

host of the infidels. I shall here observe, what I must often repeat, that the

charge of the Arabs was not like that of the Greeks and Romans, the effort of

a firm and compact infantry: their military force was chiefly formed of
cavalry

and archers; and the engagement, which was often interrupted and often renewed

by single combats and flying skirmishes, might be protracted without any
decisive

event to the continuance of several days. The periods of the battle of Cadesia

were distinguished by their peculiar appellations. The first, from the well-
timed

appearance of six thousand of the Syrian brethren, was denominated the day of

succour. The day of concussion might express the disorder of one, or perhaps

of both, of the contending armies. The third, a nocturnal tumult, received the

whimsical name of the night of barking, from the discordant clamours, which

were compared to the inarticulate sounds of the fiercest animals. The morning

of the succeeding day determined the fate-of Persia; and a seasonable
whirlwind

drove a cloud of dust against the faces of the unbelievers. The clangour of
arms

was re-echoed to the tent of Rustam, who, far unlike the ancient hero of his

name, was gently reclining in a cool and tranquil shade, amidst the baggage of
his

camp, and the train of mules that were laden with gold and silver. On the
sound

of danger he started from his couch; but his flight was overtaken by a valiant

Arab, who caught him by the foot, struck off his head, hoisted it on a lance,
and

instantly returning to the field of battle, carried slaughter and dismay among
the

thickest ranks of the Persians. The Saracens confess a loss of seven thousand
five

hundred men; and the battle of Cadesia is justly described by the epithets of
obsti­

nate and atrocious. (1) The standard of the monarchy was overthrown and cap­

tured in the field,—a leathern apron of a blacksmith, who, in ancie.it times,
had

arisen the deliverer of Persia; but this badge of heroic poverty was
disguised, and

almost concealed, by a profusion of precious gems. (2; After this victory, the

wealthy province of Irak or Assyria submitted to the caliph, and his conquests

were firmly established by the speedy foundation of Bassora,(3) a place which

ever commands the trade and navigation of the Persians. At the distance of

fourscore miles from the gulf, the Euphrates and Tigris unite in a broad and
di­

rect current, which is aptly stated the river of the Arabs. In the midway, be­

tween the junction and the mouth of these famous streams; the new settlement

was planted on the western bank: the first colony was composed of eight
hundred

Moslems: but the influence of the situation soon reared a flourishing and
populous

capital. The air, though excessively hot, is pure and healthy: the meadows are

filled with palm trees and cattle: and one of the adjacent valleys has been
cele­

brated among the four paradises or gardens of Asia. Under the first caliphs,

the jurisdiction of this Arabian colony extended over the southern provinces
of

Persia: the city has been sanctified by the tombs of the companions and
martyrs;

and the vessels of Europe still frequent the port of Bassora, as a convenient
sta­

tion and passage of the Indian trade.

After the defeat of Cadesia, a country intersected by rivers and canals might

have opposed an insuperable barrier to the victorious cavalry; and the walls
of

Ctesiphon, or Madayn, which had resisted the battering rams of the Romans,

would not have yielded to the darts of the Saracens. But the flying Persians
were

overcome by the belief, that the last day of their religion and empire was at
hand;

the strongest posts were abandoned by treachery or cowardice; and the king,
with

a part of his family and treasures, escaped to Holwan, at the foot of the
Median

hills. In the third month after the battle, Said, the lieutenant of Omar,
passed

the Tigris without opposition; the capital was taken by assault; and the
disorderly-

resistance of the people gave a keener edge to the sabres of the Moslems, who

shouted with religious transport,—" This is the white palace of Chosroes, this
is

the promise of the apostle of Clod." The naked robbers of the desert were sud­

denly enriched beyond the measure of their hope or knowledge. Each chamber

revealed a new treasure secreted with art, or ostentatiously displayed: the
gold

and two stations from Cufa. Otter (Voyage, torn. i. p. 163.) reckons fifteen
leagues,and observes, that the place

is supplied with dates and water.

(1) Atrox, eontumax, plus semel renovatum, are the well chosen expressions of
the translator of Abutfcda

(Kenke,p. 69.)

(2) D'Herbelot, Bibliolheque Orientale, p. 297—348.

(3) The reader may satisfy himself on the subject of Bassora. by consulting
the following writers,—Geograpn.

Nuu'1(™ p. D'Herbelot, Bibliotlieque Orientale,p. 192. D'Anrille, I'Euphrate
et le Tigre, p. 130. 133. Its.

ll^ynal,Hist. Philosopliique des deux Indes. torn. ii. p. 92—100. Voyages de
Pietrodella ValIe,tom. ii. p. 370

He Tavernier, torn. i. p. 240—247. De Thevenot, torn. it. p. 545—584. De
Otter, torn. ii. p. 45—78. De

Neibnhr, torn. ii. p. 172-199.

