OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 145

2. The obligations of the second class, as they were contracted by the
delivery

of a thing, are marked by the civilians with the epithet of real. (1) A
grateful re­

turn is due to the author of a benefit; and whoever is intrusted with the
property of

another, has bound himself to the sacred duty of restitution. In the case of a

friendly loan, the merit of generosity is on the side of the lender only; in a
deposite, .

on the side of the receiver: but in a pledge, and the rest of the selfish
commerce

of ordinary life, the benefit is compensated by an equivalent, and the
obligation to

restore is variously modified by the nature of the transaction. The Latin
language

very happily expresses the fundamental difference between the commodalum and

the mutuum, which our poverty is reduced to confound under the vague and com­

mon appellation of a loan. In the former, the borrower was obliged to restore
the

same individual thing with which be had been accommodated for the temporary

supply of his wants; in the latter, it was destined for his use and
consumption, and

he discharged this mutual engagement, by substituting the same specific value,

according to a just estimation of number, of weight, and of measure. In the
con­

tract of sale, the absolute dominion is transferred to the purchaser, and he
repays

the benefit with an adequate sum of gold or silver, the price and universal
standard

of all earthly possessions. The obligation of another contract, that of
location, is

of a more complicated kind. Lands or houses, labour or talents, may be hired
for

a definite term; at the expiration of the time, the thing itself must be
restored to

the owner with an additional reward for the beneficial occupation and
employment.

In these lucrative contracts, to which may be added those of partnership and
com­

missions, the civilians sometimes imagine the delivery of the object, and
sometimes

presume the consent of the parties. The substantial pledge has been refined
into

the invisible rights of a mortgage or hyfwtheca; and the agreement of sale,
for a

certain price, imputes, from that moment, the chances of gain or loss to the
ac­

count of the purchaser. It may be fairly supposed, that every man will obey
the

dictates of his interest; and if he accepts the benefit, he is obliged to
sustain

the expense, of the transaction. In this boundless subject, the historian will
ob­

serve the location of land and money, the rent of the one and the interest of
the other,

as they materially affect the prosperity of agriculture and commerce. The
land­

lord was often obliged to advance the stock andinstruments of husbandry, and
to con­

tent himself with a partition of the fruits. If the feeble tenant was
oppressed by acci­

dent, contagion, or hostile violence, he claimed a proportionable relief from
the equi­

ty of the laws: five years were the customary term, and no solid or costly
improvements

could be expected from a farmer, who, at each moment, might be ejected by the

sale of the estate. (2) Usury, (3) the inveterate grievance of the city, had
been dis­

couraged by the twelve tables, (4) and abolished by the clamours of the
people. It

■was revived by their wants and idleness, tolerated by the discretion of the
pretors,

and finally determined by the code of Justinian. Persons of illustrious rank
were

confined to the moderate profit of four per cent.; six was pronounced to be
the

ordinary and legal standard of interest; eight was allowed for the convenience
of

manufacturers and merchants; twelve was granted to nautical ensurance, which

the wiser ancients had not attempted to define; but except in this perilous
adven­

ture, the practice of exorbitant usury was severely restrained. (5) The most
sim-

beginning of the present century, appear to have studied the civil law on the
most just and liberal princi"

pies.

(1) The nice and various subject of contracts hy consent is spread over fiiur
books (17—20.) of the Pan­

dects, and is one of the parts best deserving of the attention of an English
student.

(2) The covenants of rent are denned in the Pandects (lib. xix.) and the Code,
(lib. is-, tit. 65.) The quin­

quennium, or term of five years, appears to have been a custom rather than a
law; but in France, all leases

of land were determined in nine years. This limitation was removed only in the
year 1775, (Encyclopedic

Methodique, torn. i. de la Jurisprudence, p. 668. 669.) and I am sorry to
observe that it yet prevails in the

beauteous and happy country where I am permitted to reside.

(3) I might implicitly acquiesce in the sense and learning of the three books
of G. Noodt, de ftenore et

usuris. (Opp. torn. i. p. 175—268.) The interpretation of the asses or
centesimal usurae at twelve, the uncia-

riae at one per cent, is maintained by the best critics and civilians; Nnodt.
(lib. ii. c. 2. p. 207.) Gravina. (Opp.

p. 205, &c. 210.) Heineccius, (Antiquitat. ad Institut. lib. iii. tit. 15.)
Montesquieu, (Esprit, des I.oix, lib. xxii.

c.22. tom.ii. p. 36. Defense de PEsprit des Loix. torn. iii. p. 478, fee. and
above all John Frederic Gronovius,

(de Pecunia Veteri, lib. iii. c. 13. p. 213—227.) and his three Antexegeses,
(p. 455—655.) the founder, or at least

the champion of this probable opinion; which is however perplexed with some
difficulties.

(4) Prirao duodecim tabulis sancitnm est ne quis uneiario fcenore amplies
exerceret. (Tacit. Annal.

16.) Pour peu (says Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. xxii. c. 22.) qu'on
soit verse dans I'histoire de Rome,

on verra qu'une pareille loi ne devoir pas etre Pouvrage des decemvirs. Was
Tacitus ignorant—or stupid?

But the wiser and more virtuous patricians might sacrifice their avarice to
their ambition, and might attempt

to check the odious practice by such interest as no lender would accept, and
such penalties as no debtor would

incur.

(5) Justinian has not condescended to five usury a place in the Institutes;
but the necessary rules and restric­

tions are inserted in the Pandects, (lib. xxii. til. 1,2.) and the Cede, lib.
iv. tit. 32,33.)

Vol. III. 19

