OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

first and greatest of the Othos. A portion of Gaul, to the west of the Rhine,
along

the banks of the Meuse and the Moselle, was assigned to the Germans, by whose

blood and language it has been tinged since the time of Csesar and Tacitus.
Be­

tween the Rhine, the Rhone, and the Alps, the successors of Otho acquired a
vain

supremacy over the broken kingdoms of Burgundy and Aries. In the north,

Christianity was propagated by the sword of Otho, the conqueror and apostle of

the Slavic nations of the Elbe and Oder; the marches of Brandenburg and
Sleswick

were fortified with German colonies; and the king of Denmark, the dukes of Po­

land and Bohemia, confessed themselves his tributary vassals. At the head of a
vic­

torious army, he passed the Alps, subdued the kingdom of Italy, delivered the
pope,

and for ever fixed the imperial crown in the name and nation of Germany. From

that memorable era, two maxims of public jurisprudence were introduced by
force

and ratified by time. I. That the prince who was elected in the German diet,
ac­

quired from that instant the subject kingdoms of Italy and Rome. II. But that

he might not legally assume the titles of emperor and Augustus, till he had
re­

ceived the crown from the hands of the Roman pontiff. (1)

The imperial dignity of Charlemagne was announced to the east by the altera­

tion of his style; and instead of saluting his fathers, the Greek emperors, he
pre­

sumed to adopt the more equal and familiar appellation of brother. (2) Perhaps

in his connexion with Irene he aspired to the name of husband; his embassy to

Constantinople spoke the language of peace and friendship, and might conceal a

treaty of marriage with that ambitious princess, who had renounced the most
sa­

cred duties of a mother. The nature, the duration, the probable consequences,

of such a union between two distant and dissonant empires, it is impossible to
con­

jecture: but the unanimous silence of the Latins may teach us to suspect, that
the

report was invented by the enemies of Irene, to chargat her with the guilt of
be­

traying the church and state to the strangers of the west. (3) The French am­

bassadors were the spectators, and had nearly been the victims, of the
conspiracy

of Nicephorus, and the national hatred. Constantinople was exasperated by the

treason and sacrilege of ancient Rome: a proverb, " That the Franks were good

friends and bad neighbours," was in every one's mouth; but it was dangerous to

provoke a neighbour who might be tempted to reiterate, in the church of St.
So­

phia, the ceremony of his imperial coronation. After a tedious journey of
circuit

and delay, the ambassadors of Nicephorus found him in his camp, on the banks,

of the river Sala; and Charlemagne affected to confound their vanity by
displaying,

in a Franconian village, the pomp, or at least the pride, of the Byzantine
palace. (4)

The Greeks were successively led through four halls of audience: in the first,
they

were ready to fall prostrate before a splendid personage in a chair of state,
till he

informed them that he was only a servant, the constable or master of the horse
of

the emperor. The same mistake and the same answer, were repeated in the

apartments of the count palatine, the steward and the chamberlain; and their
im­

patience was gradually heightened, till the doors of the presence-chamber were

thrown open, and they beheld the genuine monarch, on his throne, enriched with

the foreign luxury which he despised, and encircled with the love and
reverence

of his victorious chiefs. A treaty of alliance was concluded between the two
em­

pires, and the limits of the east and west were defined by the right of
present pos­

session. But the Greeks(5) soon forgot this humiliating equality, or
remembered

it only to hate the barbarians by whom it was extorted. During the short union

of virtue and power, they respectfully saluted the august Charlemagne with the

acclamations of basileus, and emperor of the Romans. As soon, as these
qualities

were separated in the person of his pious son, the Byzantine letters were
inscribed,

(0 The power of custom forces roe to number Conrad I. and Henry I.,lhe Fowler,
in the list of emperors,

a title which was never assumed by those kings of Germany. The Italians,
Muratori, for instance, are more

scrupulous and correct, and only reckon the princes who have been crowned at
Rome.

(9) invidiam tamen suseepti norainis, (C. P.) imperatoribus super hoc
indignantibus magna tulit patientia,

vicitque eorum contumaciam . . . mittendo ad cos crebas legationes, et in
epistolis fratres eos appellando.

(Eginhard, c uviii. p. 128.) Perhaps it was on their account that, like
Augustus, he affected some reluctance

to receive the empire.

(3) Theophanes speaks nf the coronation and unction of Charles, K«pou>.w;,
(Chronograph, p. 39°.) and of

his treaty of marriage with Irene, (p. 403.) which is unknown to the Latins.
Gaillard relates his transactions

with the Greek empire, (torn. ii. p. 446—468.)

(4) Gaillard very properly observes, that this pageant was a farce suitable to
children only; but that it was

indeed represented in the presence, and for ihe benefit of children of a
larger growth.

(5) Compare, in the original texts collected by Pagi, (torn. iii. A. D. 813.
no. 7. A. D. 824. no. 10, Sec,) the

contrast of Charlemagne and hit son: to the former the ambassadors of Michael,
(who were indeed disavowed)

snore suo, id est lingua Grseca, lautles dixerunt, imperatorem eum et Bv^es
appellantes; to the latter, vacate

imperatori Franetnm, &e.

