528 THE DECLINE AND FALL

vine law:(l) the whole was faithfully collected in one common mass: a fifth of
the

gold and silver, the prisoners and cattle, the moveables and immoveables, were

reserved by the prophet for pious and charitable uses; the remainder was
shared

in adequate portions, by the soldiers who had obtained the victory or guarded
the

camp; the rewards of the slain devolved to their widows and orphans; and the

increase of cavalry was encouraged by the allotment of a double share to the
horse

and to the man. From all sides the roving Arabs were allured to the standard
of

religion and' plunder: the apostle sanctified the license of embracing the
female

captives as their wives or concubines; and the enjoyment of wealth and beauty

was a feeble type of the joys of paradise prepared for the valiant martyrs of
the

faith. " The sword (says Mahomet) is the key of heaven and of hell; a drop of

blood shed in the cause of God, a night spent in arms, is of more avail than
two

months of fasting or prayer: whosoever falls in battle, his sins are forgiven:
at the

day of judgment his wounds shall be resplendent as vermilion, and odoriferous
as

musk: and the loss of his limbs shall be supplied by the wings of angels and
che-

rubims." The intrepid souls of the Arabs were fired with enthusiasm: the pic­

ture of the invisible world was strongly painted on their imagination; and the
death

which they had always despised became an object of hope and desire. The Koran

inculcates, in the most absolute sense, the tenets of fate and predestination,
which

would extinguish both industry and virtue, if the actions of man were governed
by

his speculative belief. Yet their influence in every age has exalted the
courage

of the Saracens and Turks. The first companions of Mahomet advanced to bat­

tle with a fearless confidence: there is no danger where there is no chance:
they

were ordained to perish in their beds; or they were safe and invulnerable
amidst

the darts of the enemy. (2)

Perhaps the Koreish would have been content with the flight of Mahomet, had

they not been provoked and alarmed by the vengeance of an enemy, who could

intercept their Syrian trade as it passed and repassed through the territory
of Me­

dina. Abu Sophian himself, with only thirty or forty followers, conducted a
weal­

thy caravan of a thousand camels: the fortune or dexterity of his march
escaped

the vigilance of Mahomet; but the chief of the Koreish was informed that the

holy robbers were placed in ambush to wait his return. He despatched a messen­

ger to his brethren of Mecca, and they were roused, by the fear of losing
their

merchandise and their provisions, unless they hastened to his relief with the
mi­

litary force of the city. The sacred band of Mahomet was formed of three hun­

dred and thirteen Moslems, of whom seventy-seven were fugitives, and the rest

auxiliaries: they mounted by turns a train of seventy camels (the camels of
Yath-

reb were formidable in war:) but such was the poverty of his first disciples,
that

only two could appear on horseback in the field. (3) In the fertile and famous
vale

of Beder,(4) three stations from Medina, he was informed by his scouts of the
ca­

ravan that approached on one side; of the Koreish, one hundred horse, eight
hun­

dred and fifty foot, who advanced on the other. After a short debate, he
sacrificed

the prospect of wealth to the pursuit of glory and revenge; and a slight
intrench-

ment was formed to cover his troops, and a stream ot fresh water that glided

through the valley. " O God," he exclaimed as the numbers of the Koreish de­

scended from the hills, " O God, if these are destroyed, by whom wilt thou be

worshipped on the earth? Courage, my children, close your ranks; discharge

your arrows, and the day is your own." At these words he placed himself, with

Abubeker, on a throne or pulpit,(5) and instantly demanded the succour of Ga-

(1) The whole subject de jure belli Mohammedanorum, is exhausted in a separate
dissertation by the learned

Reland. (Dissertationes Miscellaneie, torn. iii. Dissert, x. p. 3—53.)

(2) The doctrine of absolute predestination, on which few religions can
reproach each other, is sternly ex­

posed in the Koran, (c. 3. p. 52, 53. c. 4. p. 70, &c. with rbe notes of Sale,
and c. 17. p. 413. with those of Ma-

racci.) Reland (de Relig. Mohamm. p. 61—64.) and Sale (Prelim. Discourse, p.
103.) represents the opinions of

the doctors, and our modern travellers the confidence, the fading confidence,
of the Turks.

(3) Al Jannabi (apud Gagnier, torn. ii. p. 9.) allows him seventy or eighty
horse; and on two other occasions

prior to the battle of Ohud, he enlists a body of Thirty (p. 10.) and of five
hundred (p. 66.) troopers. Yet the

Mussulmans, in the field of Ohud, had no more than two horses, according to
the better sense of Abnlfeda (in

Vit. Mohamm. p. 31. p. 65.) In the Stony province, the camels were numerous;
but the bone appears to have

been less common than in the Happy or the Desert Arabia.

(4) Beder Houneene, twenty miles from Medina, and forty from Mecca, is on the
high road of the caravan of

Egypt; and the pilgrims annually commemorate the prophet's victory by
illuminations, rockets, &c. Shaw's

Travels, p. 477.

(5) The place to which Mahomet retired during the action is styled by Gagnier,
(in Abulfeda, c. xxvii. p. 53.

Vie de Mahomet, torn. it. p. 30, 33.) Umbraeulunu "tie loge de bw avec une
parte. The same Arabic word is

rendered by Reiske (Annales de Mosicmici Abulfedte, p. 23.) by Solium
Suggestus editor; and the difference is

of the utmost moment for the honour both of the interpreter and of the hero. I
am sorry to observe the pride

and acrimony with which the Reiske chastises his fellow-labourer. Swpe licvt
rtit, tit integra: paging; tic­

