OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

house, and with a steady look, though a faltering voice, uttered the last
broken,

though articulate words: "OGod! .... pardon my sins! Yes, . .'. .

I come, among my fellow-citizens on high; and thus peaceably expired

on a carpet spread upon the floor. An expedition for the conquest of Syria was

stopped by this mournful event; the army halted at the gates of Medina; the
chiefs

were assembled round their dying master. The city, more especially the house

of the prophet, was a scene of clamorous sorrow, or of silent despair:
fanaticism

alone could suggest a ray of hope and consolation. " How can he be dead, our

witness, our intercessor, our mediator with God? " By God, he is not dead;
like

Moses and Jesus he is wrapt in a holy trance, and speedily will he return to
his

faithful people." The evidence of sense was disregarded; and Omar unsheathing

his scimitar, threatened to strike off the heads of the infidels, who should
dare to

affirm that the prophet was no more. The tumult was appeased by the weight

and moderation of Abubeker. " Is it Mahomet," said he to Omar and the multi­

tude, " or the God of Mahomet, whom you worship? The God of Mahomet liveth

for ever, but the apostle was a mortal like ourselves, and, according to his
own

prediction, he has experienced the common fate of mortality." He was piously

interred by the hands of his nearest kinsman, on the same spot on which he ex­

pired.^) Medina has been sanctified by the death and burial of Mahomet: and

the innumerable pilgrims of Mecca often turn aside from the way, to bow in
volun­

tary devotion,(2) before the simple tomb of the prophet.(3)

At the conclusion of the life of Mahomet, it may perhaps be expected that I

should balance his faults and virtues, that I should decide whether the title
of en­

thusiast or imposter more properly belongs to that extraordinary man. Had I

been intimately conversant with the son of Abdallah, the task would still be
diffi­

cult, and the success uncertain: at the distance of twelve centuries, I darkly
con­

template his shade through a cloud of religious incense; and could I truly
deline­

ate the portrait of an hour, the fleeting resemblance would not equally apply
to

the solitary of mount Hera, to the preacher of Mecca, and to the conqueror of

Arabia. The author of a mighty revolution appears to have been endowed with

a pious and contemplative disposition: so soon as marriage had raised him
above

the pressure of want, he avoided the paths of ambition and avarice; and, till
the

age of forty, he lived with innocence, and would have died without a name. The

unity of God is an idea most congenial to nature and reason; and a slight
conver-

sation with the Jews and Christians, would teach him to despise and detest the

idolatry of Mecca. It was the duty of a man, and a citizen, to impart the doc­

trine of salvation, to rescue his country from the dominion of sin and error.
The

energy of a mind incessantly bent on the same object, would convert a general
ob­

ligation into a particular call; the warm suggestions of the understanding, or
the

fancy, would be felt as the inspirations of heaven; the labour of thought
would

expire in rapture and vision; and the inward sensation, the invisible
monitor,,

would be described with the form and attributes of an angel of God,(4) From

enthusiasm to imposture, the step is perilous and slippery; the demon of
Socra-

tes(5) affords a memorable instance, how a wise man may deceive himself, how a

(1) The Greeks and Latins have invented and propagated the vulgar and
ridicnlous story that Mahomet's-

iron tomb is suspended in the air at Mecca (<r*fix t^rtaft^ftevov : Laonicus
Chalcocondyles des Rebus Turcicis*

lib. iii. p. 660 by the action of equal and potent loadstones (l)ictionaire de
Bayle, Mahomet^ Rem. EE. FF.)

Without any philosophical inquiries, it may_ suffice, that. 1. The prophet was
not buried at Mecca: and, 2,

That his tomb at Medina, which has been visited by millions, is placed on the
ground (Reland de Relig. Mo-

ham. lib. ii. c. 19. p. 200—211.) Gagnier (Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p.
263—268.)

(2) Al Jannahi enumerates (Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 372—391.) the
multifarious duties of a pilgrim who

visited the tomb of the prophet and his companions, and the learned casuist
decides, that this act of devotion u

nearest in obligation and merit to a divine precept. The doctors are divided
which, of Mecca and Medina, be

the most excellent, p. 391—394.)

(3) The last sickness, death, and burial, of Mahomet, are described by
Abulfeda and GagnierfVit. Mohftm.

p. 137—142. Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 220—271.) The most private and
interesting circumstances were ori­

ginally veceived from Ayesha, Ali, the sons of Abbas, Sec. and as they dwelt
at Medina, and survived the pro­

phet many years, they might repeat the pious tale to a second or third
generation of pilgrims.

(4) The Christians, rashly enough, have assigned to Mahomet a tame pigeon,
that seemed to descend from

heaven and whisper in his ear. As this pi-etended miracle is urged by Grotius
(de Veritate Religionis Christ

iansej his Arabic translator, the learned Pocock, inquired of him the names of
his authors; and Grotius con­

fessed, that it is unknown to the Mahometans themselves. Lest it should
provoke their indignation and laughter,

the pious lit is suppressed in the Arabic version; but it has obtained an
edifying place in the numerous edi­

tions of the Latin text (Pocock, Specimen, Hist. Arabum, p. 186,187. Reland,
de Religion. Moham. lib. ii. c.

39. p. 2«9-62.)

yrpxmtvj nparpiwii Ss owors (Plato, in Apolog. Socrat. c. xia. p. 121,122.
edit. Fischer.) The familiar examples,

which Socrates urges in his Dialogue with Theages (Platon. Optra, torn. i. p.
128, 129. edit. Hen. Stcphan.) are

beyontl the reach of human foresight: and the divine inspiration (the
Asei^ovtov) of the philosopher, is clearly

taught in the Memorabilia of Xenonhon. The ideas of the most rational
Platonists are expressed by Cicero (de

Divmat. i. 54.) and in the fourteenth and fifteenth Dissertations of Maxima;
of Tyre (p. 153—172. edit. Davis.;

