MA THE DECLINE AND FALL

of the church. Their votaries have exhausted the bitterness of religious gall,
ih

their portrait of this spotted panther', this antichrist, this flying dragon
of the ser­

pent's seed, who surpassed the vices of Elagabalus and Nero. His reign was a

long butchery of whatever was most noble, or holy, or innocent, in his empire.
In

person, the emperor assisted at the execution of his victims, surveyed their
ago­

nies, listened to their groans, and indulged, without satiating his appetite
for blood:

a plate of noses was accepted as a grateful offering, and his domestics were
often

pollution of his baptismal font. The infant might be excused; but the manly

pleasures of Copronymus degraded him below the level of a brute; his lust con­

founded the eternal distinctions of sex and species; and he seemed to extract
some

unnatural delight from the objects most offensive to human sense. In his
religion,

the Iconoclast was a heretic, a Jew, a Mahometan, a pagan, and an atheist; and
his

belief of an invisible power could be discovered only in his magic rites,
human vic­

tims, and nocturnal sacrifices to Venus and the demons of antiquity. His life
was

stained with the most opposite vices, and the ulcers which covered his body,
anti­

cipated before his death the sentiment of hell tortures. Of these accusations,

which I have so patiently copied, a part is refuted by its own absurdity; and
in the

private anecdotes of the life of princes, the lie is more easy as the
detection is

more difficult. Without adopting the pernicious maxim, that were much is al­

leged, something must be true, I can, however, discern that Constantine V, was

dissolute and cruel. Calumny is more prone to exaggerate than to invent; and
her

licentious tongue is checked in some measure by the experience of the age and

country to which she appeals. Of the bishops and monks, the generals and ma­

gistrates, who are said to have suffered under his reign, the numbers are
recorded,

the names were conspicuous, the execution was public, the mutilation visible
and

permanent. The catholics hated the person and government of Copronymus;

but even their hatred is a proof of their oppression. They dissemble the
provo­

cations which might excuse or justify his rigour; but even these provocations
must

gradually inflame his resentment, and harden his temper in the use or the
abuse

of despotism. Yet the character of the fifth Constantine was not devoid of
merit,

nor did his government always deserve the curses or the contempt of the
Greeks.

From the confession of his enemies, I am informed of the restoration of an
ancient

aqueduct, of the redemption of two thousand five hundred captives, of the
uncom­

mon plenty of the times, and of the new colonies with which he repeopled
Constan­

tinople and the Thracian cities. They reluctantly praise his activity and
courage;

he was on horseback in the field at the head of his legions; and although the

fortune of his arms was various, he triumphed by sea and land, on the
Euphrates

and the Danube, in civil and barbarian war. Heretical praise must be cast into

the scale, to counterbalance the weight of orthodox invective. The Iconoclasts

revered the virtues of the prince: forty years after his death, they still
prayed

before the tomb of the saint. A miraculous vision was propagated by fanaticism

or fraud; and the Christian hero appeared on a milk-white steed brandishing
his

lance against the pagans of Bulgaria: " an absurd fable," says the catholic
histo­

rian, " since Copronymus is chained with the demons in the abyss of hell."

Leo IV. the son of the fifth, and the father of the sixth Constantine, was of
a

feeble constitution both of mind and body, and the principal care of his reign
was

the settlement of the succession. The association of the young Constantine was

urged by the officious zeal of his subjects: and the emperor, conscious of his
de­

cay, complied, after a prudent hesitation, with their unanimous wishes. The

royal infant, at the age of five years, was crowned with his mother Irene; and
the

national consent was ratified by every circumstance of pomp and solemnity,
that

could dazzle the eyes, or bind the conscience of the Greeks. An oath of
fidelity

was administered in the palace, the church, and the hippodrome, to the several

orders of the state, who abjured the holy names of the son and mother of God.

*' Be witness, u Christ! that we will watch over the safety of Constantine the son  
of Leo, expose our lives in his service, and bear true allegiance to his
person and

posterity." They pledged their faith on the wood of the true' cross, and the
act

of their engagement was deposited on the altar of St. Sophia. The first to
swear,

and the first to violate their oath, were the five sons of Copronymus by a
second

marriage; and the story of these princes is singular and tragic. The tight of
pri­

mogeniture excluded them from the throne; the injustice of their elder brother

defrauded them of a legacy of about two millions sterling; some vain titles
were

not deemed a sufficient compensation for wealth and power; and they repeatedly

surname was derived from his

