THE DECLINE ANJJ FALL

the invasion of Italy is applied by Procopius to the second year of the Gothic

war.(l)

After Belisarius had left sufficient garrisons in Palermo and Syracuse, he em­

barked his troops at Messina, and landed them, without resistance, on the
oppo­

site shores of Rhegium. A Gothic prince, who had married the daughter of

Theodatus, was stationed with an army to guard the entrance of Italy; but he

imitated, without scruple, the example of a sovereign, faithless to his public
and

private duties. The perfidious Ebermor deserted with his followers to the
Roman

camp, and was dismissed to enjoy the servile honours of the Byzantine court.
(2)

From Rhegium to Naples, the fleet and army of Belisarius, almost always in
view

of each other, advanced near three hundred miles along the sea-coast. The peo­

ple of Bruttium, Lucania, and Campania, who abhorred the name and religion of

the Goths, embraced the specious excuse, that their ruined walls were
incapable of

defence; the soldiers paid a just equivalent for a plentiful market; and
curiosity

alone interrupted the peaceful occupations of the husbandman or artificer. Na­

ples, which has swelled to a great and populous capital, long cherished the
lan­

guage and manners of a Grecian colony;(3) and the choice of Virgil had
ennobled

this elegant retreat, which attracted the lovers of repose and study, from the
noise,

the smoke, and the laborious opulence of Rome. (4) As soon as the place was
in­

vested by sea and land, Belisarius gave audience to the deputies of the
people, who

exhorted him to disregard a conquest unworthy of his arms, to seek the Gothic

king in a field of battle, and, after his victory, to claim, as the sovereign
of Rome,

the allegiance of the dependent cities.—"When I treat with my enemies,"
replied

the Roman chief, with a haughty smile, " I am more accustomed to give than to
re-,

ceivecounsel: but I hold in one hand inevitable ruin, and in the other peace,
and

freedom, such as Sicily now enjoys." The impatience of delay urged him to
grant

the most liberal terms; his honour secured their performance; but Naples was
di­

vided into two factions; and the Greek democracy was inflamed by their
orators,

who with much spirit and some truth, represented to the multitude, that the
Goths

would punish their defection, and that Belisarius himself must esteem their
loyal­

ty and valour. Their deliberations, however, were not perfectly free: the city
was,

commanded by eight hundred barbarians, whose wives and children were detained

at Ravenna as the pledges of their fidelity; and even the Jews, who were rich
and

numerous, resisted with desperate enthusiasm, the intolerant laws of
Justinian.

In a much later period, the circumference of Naples(5) measured only two thou­

sand three hundred and sixty-three paces :(6) the fortifications were defended
by

precipices or the sea: when the aqueducts were intercepted, a supply of water

might be drawn from wells and fountains; and the stock of provisions was
sufficient

to consume the patience of the besiegers. At the end of twenty days, that of
Be­

lisarius was almost exhausted, and he had reconciled himself to the disgrace
of

abandoning the siege, that he might march, before the winter season, against
Rome

and the Gothic king. But his anxiety was relieved by the bold curiosity of an
Isau-

rian, who explored the dry channel of an aqueduct, and secretly reported, that
a

passage might be perforated to introduce a file of armed soldiers into the
heart of

the city. When the work had been silently executed, the humane general risked

the discovery of his secret, by a last and fruitless admonition of the
impending dan­

ger. In the darkness of the night, four hundred Romans entered the aqueduct,
raised

themselves by a rope, which they fastened to an olive tree, into the house or
gar-

Justinian and of the Ootliie war; arid his first era coincides with the first
of April, 135, and not 536, accord­

ing to the Annals of Baronias (Pagi, Crit, torn. ii. p. 555, who is followed
by Muratori and the editors of Sigo-

nius.) Yet in some passages we are at a loss to reconcile the dates of
Procopius with himself, and with the

Chronicle of Marceliinus.

(1) The series of the first Gothic war is represented by Procopius (lib. i. c
5—39. lib. ii. e, 1—30. lib. iii. e. 1.)

till the captivity of Vitiges. With the aid of Sigonius (Opp. torn. i. de Imp.
Occident, lib. 17, 18.) and Mu­

ratori (Annali d'ltalia, torn, v.) I have gleaned some few additional facts.

(2) Jornandes, de Rebus Geticis, c. lx. p. 702. edit. Grot, and torn. i. p.
S21. Muratori, de Success. Regn.

p. 241.

(3) Nero (says Tacitus. Annal. 15.35.) Neapolim quasi Gnecam urbem delegit.
One hundred and fifty years

afterward, in the time of Septimius Severus, the Hellenism of the Neapolitans
is praised by Philostratus: yevo;

E*AtJV!5 **' *TTW»I, oSsv xa( Tass trirOvSxi Ta>v Kvymv Ea.Mv»xoi * »o-t
(Icon. lib. i. p. 763. edit. Olear.)

(4) The otium of Naples is praised by the Roman poets, by Virgil, Horace,
Silius Italicus, and Statins (Clu-

ver. Ital. Ant. lib. iv. p. 1149,1150.) In an elegant epistle (Sylv. lib. iii.
v. p. 94—98. edit. Markland,) Statius

undertakes the difficult task of drawing his wife from the pleasures of Rome
to that calm retreat.

(5) This measure was taken by Roger I. after the conquest of Naples (A. D.
1139,) which he made the capi­

tal of his new kingdom (Giannone, Iitoria Civile, torn. ii. p. 169.) That
city, the third in Christian Europe,

is now at least twelve miles in circumference (Jul. Csesar. Capaccii Hist.
Neopol. lib. i. p. 47.J and contains more

inhabitants (three hundred and fifty thousand) in a given space, than any
other spot in the known world.

(6) Not geometrical, but common paces or steps, of twenty.two French inches:
d'Anville, Mesures Itinera­

ries, p. 7,8.) the two thousand three hundred and siMy-three do not make an
English niile.

