OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE* 193

couraged his subjects and allies to march with the successors of Constantino
under

the faithful and victorious banner of the cross. When the legions of Lucullus
and

Pompey first passed the Euphrates, they blushed at their easy victory over the

natives of Armenia. But the long experience of war had hardened the minds and

bodies of that effeminate people; their zeal and bravery were approved in the
ser­

vice of a declining empire; they abhorred and feared the usurpation of the
house

of Sassan, and the memory of persecution envenomed their pious hatred of the

enemies of Christ. The limits of Armenia, as it had been ceded to the emperor

Maurice, extended as far as the Araxes; the river submitted to the dignity of
a

bridge;(l) and Heraclius, in the footsteps of Mark Antony, advanced towards
the

city of Tauris or Gandzaca,(2) the ancient and modern capital of one of the
pro­

vinces of Media. At the head of forty thousand men, Chosroes himself had re­

turned from some distant expedition to oppose the progress of the Roman arms;

but he retreated on the approach of Heraclius, declining the generous
alternative of

peace or battle. Instead of half a million of inhabitants, which have been
ascribed

to Tauris under the reign of the Sophys, the city contained no more than three

thousand houses: but the value of the royal treasures was enhanced by a tradi­

tion, that they were the spoils of Crossus, which had been transported by
Cyrus,

from the citadel of Sardes. The rapid conquests of Heraclius were suspended

only by the winter season; a motive of prudence or superstition,(3) determined
his

retreat into the province of Albania, along the shores of the Caspian; and his
tents

were most probably pitched in the plains of Mogan,(4) the favourite encampment

of oriental princes. In the course of this successful inroad, he signalized
the zeal

and revenge of a Christian emperor: at his command, the soldiers extinguished

the fire, and destroyed the temples of the Magi: the statues of Chosroes, who
as­

pired to divine honours, were abandoned to the flames; and the ruins of
Thebarma

orOrmia,(5) which had given birth to Zoroaster himself, made some atonement

for the injuries of the holy sepulchre. A purer spirit of religion was shown
in the

relief and deliverance of fifty thousand captives. Heraclius was rewarded by

their tears and grateful acclamations; but this wise measure, which spread the

fame of his benevolence, diffused the murmurs of the Persians against the
pride

and obstinacy of their own sovereign.

Amidst the glories of a succeeding campaign, Heraclius is almost lost to our
eyes,

and to those of the Byzantine historians. (6) From the spacious and fruitful
plains of

Albania, the emperor appears to follow the chain of Hyrcanian mountains, to
de­

scend into the province of Media or Irak, and to carry his victorious arms as
far

as the royal cities of Casbin and Ispahan, which had never been approached by
a

Roman conqueror. Alarmed by the danger of his kingdom, the powers of Chos­

roes were already recalled from the Nile and the Bosphorus, and three formida­

ble armies surrounded, in a distant and hostile land, the camp of the emperor.

The Colchian allies prepared to desert his standard; and the fears of the
bravest

veterans were expressed, rather than concealed, by their desponding silence.

"Be not terrified," said the intrepid Heraclius, " by the multitude of your
foes.

With the aid of Heaven, one Roman may triumph over a thousand barbarians.

But if we devote our lives for the salvation of our brethren, we shall obtain
the

(1) Et Pontem indignatus Araxes. Virgil. £neid, viii. 728.

Toe river Araxes Is noisy, rapid, vehement, and, with the melting: of the
mows, irresistible; the strongest ami

most massy bridges are swept away by the current; and lits indignation is
attested by the vuins of many

arches near the old town of Zulfa. Voyages de Chardin, torn. i. p. 252.

(2) Chardin, torn. s. p. 255—259. With the orientals (d'Herbelot, Bibliotb.
Orient, p. 834.) he ascribes (he

foundation of Tauris, or Tebris, to Zobeide. the wife of the famous kbalif
Haroun Alrashid; hut it appears

to have been more ancient; and the names of Gandzaca, Gazaca. Gaza, are
expressive of the royal treasure.

The number of five hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants is reduced by
Chardin from one million to ont;

hundrrd thousand, the popular estimate.

(3) He opened the gospel, and applied or interpreted the first casual passage
to the name and situation of

Albania. Theophanes, p. 258.

(4) The heath of Mogan, between the Cyrus and the Araxes. is sixtv parasanes
in lenerth. and twenty in

breadth (Olearius, p. 1023,1024..) abounding in waters and fruitful pastures
(Hist, de Nadir Shah, translated

by Mr. Jones from a Persian MS. part ii. p. 2,3.) See the encampments of Timur
(Hist, par Sfcerefeddin AH,

rib. v. c. 37. lib. vi. c. 13.,; and the coronation of Nadir Shah (Hist.
Persanne, p. 3—13. and the English life of

Mr. Jones, p. 64,65.)

(5) Thebarma lml Ormia near the lake Spanto, are proved to be the same city by
D'Anville (Memoires de

PAeademie, torn, xxviii. p. 564,565.) It is honoured as the birth place of
Zoroaster according to the Persians

(Schultens, Index Geograpb. p. 48.;) and their tradition is fortified by M.
Perron d'Anquetil (Mem. de I'AcaaL

des Inscript. torn. xxxi. p. 375.,) with some texts from his, or their
Zendavesta.

(6) I cannot find, and (what is much more) M. D'AnviMe does not attempt to
seek the Salban, Tarentnm,

territorv of the Huns, ore. mentioned by Theoplianei (p. 260—262.) Antychins
(Anna), 'nm. ii. p. 231, 232.)

an insufficient author, names Aspahan; and Casbin is most probably the cily of
Sapor. Ispahan is twenty-

four days'journev from Tauris. and Casbin half way between t!tem (Voyages de
Taveniier, torn, i. p. ft3-*

82.)

Vol.. III. 2"T

