OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

bition was yet unsatisfied; and the conqueror of the Gepidx turned his eyes
from

the Danube to the richer banks of the Po and the Tiber. Fifteen years had not

elapsed since his subjects, the confederates of Narses, had visited the
pleasant

climate of Italy: the mountains, the rivers, the highways, were familiar to
their

memory; the report of their success, perhaps the view of their spoils, had
kin­

dled in the rising generation the flame of emulation and enterprise. Their
hopes

were encouraged by the spirit and eloquence of Alboin; and it is affirmed,
that

bespoke to their senses, by producing, at the royal feast, the fairest and
most ex­

quisite fruits that grew spontaneously in the garden of the world. No sooner
had

he erected his standard, than the native strength of the Lombards was
multiplied

by the adventurous youth of Germany and Scythia. The robust peasantry ot No-

ricum and Pannonia had resumed the manners of barbarians; and the names of

the Gepidx, Bulgarians, Sarmatians, and Bavarians, may be distinctly traced in

the provinces of Italy. (1) Of the Saxons, the old allies of the Lombards,
twenty

thousand warriors, with their wives and children, accepted the invitation of
Al­

boin. Their bravery contributed to his success; but the accession or the
absence

of their numbers was not sensibly felt in the magnitude of his host. Every
mode

of religion was freely practised by its respective votaries. The king of the
Lom­

bards had been educated in the Arian heresy; but the catholics, in their
public

worship, were allowed to pray for his conversion; while the more stubborn bar­

barians sacrificed a she-goat, or perhaps a captive, to the gods of their
fathers. (2)

The Lombards, and their confederates, were united by their common attachment

to a chief, who excelled in all the virtues and vices of a savage hero; and
the vi­

gilance of Alboin provided an ample magazine of offensive and defensive arms
for

the use of the expedition. The portable wealth of the Lombards attended the

march; their lands they cheerfully relinquished to the Avars, on the solemn
pro­

mise, which was made and accepted without a smile, that if they failed in the

conquest of Italy, these voluntary exiles should be reinstated in their former
pos­

sessions.

They might have failed, if Narses had been the antagonist of the Lombards;

and the veteran warriors, the associates of his Gothic victory, would have en­

countered with reluctance an enemy whom they dreaded and esteemed. But the

weakness of the Byzantine court was subservient to the barbarian cause; and it

was for the ruin of Italy, that the emperor once listened to the complaints of
his

subjects. The virtues of Narses were stained with avarice; and in his provin­

cial reign of fifteen years he accumulated a treasure of gold and silver which
sur­

passed the modesty of a private fortune. His government was oppressive or un­

popular, and the general discontent was expressed with freedom by the deputies

of Rome. Before the throne of Justin they boldly declared, that their Gothic

servitude had been more tolerable than the despotism of a Greek eunuch; and

that, unless their tyrant were instantly removed, they would consult their own

happiness in the choice of a master. The apprehension of a revolt was urged by

the voice of envy and detraction, which had so recently triumphed over the me­

rits of Belisarius. A new exarch, Longinus, was appointed to supersede the
con­

queror of Italy; and the base motives of his recall were revealed in the
insulting

mandate of the empress Sophia, " that he should leave to men the exercise of

arms, and return to his proper station among the maidens of the palace, where

a distaff should be again placed in the hand of the eunuch." " I will spin her

such a thread, as she shall not easily unravel!" is said to have been the
reply

which indignation and conscious virtue extorted from the hero. Instead of at­

tending, a slave and a victim, at the gate of the Byzantine palace he retired
to

Naples, from whence (if any credit is due to the belief of the times) Narses
in­

vited the Lombards to chastise the ingratitude of the prince and people. (3)
But

the passions of the people are furious and changeable; and the Romans soon re-

ntlui et bclla caneliantor scripsit, memoriteqtie mandavit. (Eginard, in Vit.
Carol. Magn. c. 29. p. 130, Ml.)

The poems which Coldastcommends, (Animadvers. ad Eginard, p. 207.) appear to
he recent and contempti­

ble romances. ,

(1) The other nations are rehearsed by Paul. lib. ii. c. 6. 23.) Mnratnri
(Anticliita Italiane, torn. i. dissert. 1.

p. 4.) has discovered tbe village of the Bavarians, three miles from Modcna.

(2) Gregory the Roman (Dialog, lib. apuil. Baron. Annal. Eccles. A. D. 579.
No. 10.) soppnses lhat they

likewise adored this she-goat. I know but of one religion in which the god and
the victim are the same.

(3) The charge or tbe deacon against Narses (lib. ii. c. v.) may be
groundless; but the weak apology of the

cardinal (Baron. Annal. Eccles. A. D. J67. No. 8-12.) is rejected by the best
critics—Pagi. (torn. ii. p. 639.640.)

Mura'ori (Annali'dItalia, torn. v. p. 160—181.) and the last editors,
Horatius, Blancns, (Script. Rerum. Italic,

torn. i. p. 427,438.) and Philip Argelatui, (Sigon. Opera, torn. ii. p.
11.12.) The Narses who assisted at the

coronation of Justin, (Corippus. lib. iii. 221.) is clearly understood to be a
different person.

