OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 231

Seldom been permitted to enjoy the tranquillity of servitude. 1 From the
earliest

period to the present hour, Armenia has been the theatre of perpetual war; the

lands between Taurus and Erivan were dispeopled by the cruel policy of the So­

phies; and myriads of Christian families were transplanted to perish or to
propa­

gate in the distant provinces of Persia. Under the rod of oppression, the zeal
of

the Armenians is fervent and intrepid: they have often preferred the crown of

martyrdom to the white turban of Mahomet; they devoutly hate the error and

idolatry of the Greeks; and their transient union with the Latins is not less
devoid

of truth, than the thousand bishops whom their patriarch offered at the feet
of the

Roman pontiff. (1) The catholic or patriarch of the Armenians resides in the

monastery of Ekmiasin, three leagues from Erivan. Forty-seven archbishops,

each of whom may claim the obedience of four or five suffragans, are
consecrated

by his hand; but the far greater part are only titular prelates, who dignify
with

their presence and service the simplicity of his court. As soon as they have
per­

formed the liturgy, they cultivate the garden; and our bishops will hear with
sur­

prise that the austerity of their life increases in just proportion to the
elevation of

their rank. In the fourscore thousand towns or villages of his spiritual
empire, the

patriarch receives a small and voluntary tax from each person above the age of
fif­

teen; but the annual amount of six hundred thousand crowns is insufficient to
sup­

ply the incessant demands of charity and tribute. Since the beginning of the
last

century, the Armenians have obtained a large and lucrative share of the com­

merce of the east: in their return from Europe, the caravan usually halts in
the

neighbourhood of Erivan; the altars are enriched with the fruits of their
patient

industry; and the faith of EutycheS is preached in their recent congregations
of

Barbary and Poland. (2)

V. In the rest of the Roman empire, the despotism of the prince might eradi­

cate or silence the sectaries of an obnoxious creed. But the stubborn temper
of the

Egyptians maintained their opposition to the synod of Chalcedon, and the
policy of

Justinian condescended to expect and to seize the opportunity of discord. The
Mo-

nophysite church of Alexandria(3) was torn by the disputes of the
corrufitibles and

incorrufitibles; and on the death of the patriarch, the two factions upheld
their

respective candidates. (4) Gaian was the disciple of Julian, Theodosius had
been

the pupil of Severus: the claims of the former were supported by the consent
of

the monks and senators of the city and the province; the latter depended on
the

priority of his ordination, the favour of the empress Theodora, and the arms
of

the eunuch Narses, which might have been used in more honourable warfare.

The exile of the popular candidate to Carthage and Sardinia inflamed the
ferment

of Alexandria; and, after a schism of one hundred and seventy years, the
Gaian-

ites still revered the memory and doctrine of their founder. The strength of
num­

bers and of discipline was tried in a desperate and bloody conflict; the
streets were

filled with the dead bodies of citizens and soldiers; the pious women
ascending the

roofs of the houses, showered down every sharp or ponderous utensil on the
heads

of the enemy; and the final victory of Narses was owing to the flames with
which

he wasted the third capital of the Roman world. But the lieutenant of
Justinian

, had not conquered in the cause of a heretic; Theodosius himself was
speedily,

though gently removed; and Paul of Tanis, an orthodox monk, was raised to the

throne of Anastasius. The powers of government were strained in his support;

he might appoint or displace the dukes and tribunes of Egypt; the allowance of

bread which Diocletian had granted, was suppressed, the churches were shut,
and

a nation of schismatics was deprived at once of their spiritual and carnal
food. In

his turn the tyrant was excommunicated by the zeal and revenge of the people;

and none except his servile Melchites would salute him as a man, a Christian,
or

a bishop. Yet such is the blindness of ambition, that when Paul was expelled
on

a charge of murder, he solicited, with a bribe of seven hundred pounds of
gold,

his restoration to the same station of hatred and ignominy. His successor
Apol-

linaris entered the hostile city in military array, alike qualified for prayer
or for

(0 See a remarkable (act of the, twelfth century in the History of Nieetni
Choniates (p. 253.) Vet three hun­

dred years before, Photius (Epislol. 2. p. 49. edit. Montacul) had gloried in
the conversion of the Armenians.

(2) The travelling Armenians are in the war of every traveller, and their
mother-church is nn the high road

between Constantinople and Ispahan: for their present state, see Fabricius,
(Lot F.vangelit. Sec. c. 38. p. 40—

51.) Olearius. (lib. iv. c. 40.) Chardin. vol. ii. p. 2%?.) Tournefort,
flettre 20.) and, above all. Tavemier, (torn. j.

p. 28—37.510—518.) that rambling jeweller, who had read nothing, but had seen
so much and so well.

(3) The history of the Alexandrian patriarchs from Dioscorus to Benjamin is
taken from Renaudot, (p. 114,

164.) and the second tome of the Annals of Butycbins.

it) I.iberat. Brer. c. 20—S3. Victor. Citron, p. 329,3301 Procop. Anecrrot. c.
26.27.

