OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

Whomsoever they accused were cast into her peculiar prisons,(l) inaccessible
to

the inquiries of justice; and it was rumoured, that the torture of the rack,
or

scourge had been inflicted in the presence of a female tyrant, insensible to
the

voice of prayer or of pity.(2) Some of these unhappy victims perished in deep

unwholesome dungeons, while others were permitted, after the loss of their
limbs,

their reason, or their fortune, to appear in the world the living monuments of
her

vengeance, which was commonly extended to the children of those whom she had

suspected or injured. The senator or bishop, whose death or exile Theodora had

grenounced, was delivered to a trusty messenger, and his diligence was
quickened

y a menace from her own mouth. " If you fail in the execution of my commands,

I swear by him who liveth for ever, that your skin shall be flayed from your

body. "(3)

If the creed of Theodora had not been tainted with heresy, her exemplary de­

votion might have atoned, in the opinion of her cotemporaries, for pride,
avarice,

and cruelty. But if she employed her influence to assuage the intolerant fury
of

the emperor, the present age will allow some merit to her religion, and much
in­

dulgence to her speculative errors. (4) The name of Theodora was introduced,

with equal honour, in all the pious and charitable foundations of Justinian;
and

the most benevolent institution of his reign may be ascribed to the sympathy
of

the empress for her less fortunate sisters, who had been seduced or compelled
to

embrace the trade of prostitution. A palace, on the Asiatic side of the
Bospho-

rus, was converted into a stately and spacious monastery, and a liberal
mainte­

nance was assigned to five hundred women, who had been collected from the

streets and brothels of Constantinople. In this safe and holy retreat, they
were

devoted to perpetual confinement; and the despair of some, who threw
themselves

headlong into the sea, was lost in the gratitude of the penitents, who had
been de­

livered from sin and misery, by their generous benefactress. (5) The prudence

of Theodora is celebrated by Justinian himself; and his laws are attributed to
the

sage counsels of his most revered wife, whom he had received as the gift of
the

Deity. (6) Her courage was displayed amidst the tumult of the people and the

terrors of the court. Her chastity, from the moment of her union with
Justinian,

is founded on the silence of her implacable enemies: and, although the
daughter

of Acacius might be satisfied with love, yet some applause is due to the
firmness

of a mind which could sacrifice pleasure and habit to the stronger sense
either of

duty or interest. The wishes and prayers of Theodora could never obtain the

blessing of a lawful son, and she buried an infant daughter, the sole
offspring of

her marriage. (7) Notwithstanding this disappointment, her dominion was per­

manent and absolute; she preserved, by art or merit, the affections of
Justinian;

and their seeming dissensions were always fatal to the courtiers who believed
them

to be sincere. Perhaps her health had been impaired by the licentiousness of
her

youth; but it was always delicate, and she was directed by her physicians to
use

the Pythian warm baths. In this journey, the empress was followed by the pre-

torian prefect, the great treasurer, several counts and patricians, and a
splendid

train of four thousand attendants; the highways were repaired at her approach;

a palace was erected for her reception: and as she passed through Bithynia,
she

distributed liberal alms to the churches, the monasteries, and the hospitals,
that

they might implore Heaven for the restoration of her health. (8) At length, in

the twenty-fourth year of her marriage, and the twenty-second of her reign,
she

was consumed by a cancer;(9) and the irreparable loss was deplored by her lms-

(1) Her prison!, a labyrinth, a Tarlarm, (Anecdot. c. 4.) were under Ihe
palace. Darkness is propitious to

cruelty, but it is likewise favourable to calumny and fiction.

(2) A more jocular whipping was inflicted on Saturninus, for presuming to say
that his wife, a favourite of

the empress, had not been found mtp^to,-. (Anecdot. e. 17.)

(3) Per viventem in s&cula excoriai i te faciam. Anastasius de Vitis Pout.
Roman in Vijrilio, p. 40.

(4) Ludewig, p. 161—166. I give him credit for the charitable attempt,
although he hath not much charity

in his temper.

(5) Compare the anecdotes (c. 17.) with the Edifices, (lib. i. c. 9.) Haw
differently may the same fact be

stated! John Malala (torn. ii. p. 174, 175.) observes, that on this, or a
similar occasion, she released and clothed

the girls whom she had purchased from the stews at five aurei a-piece.

(6) Novel, viii. I. An allusion to Theodora. Her enemies read the name
Dsemouodora. (Aleman. p. 66.)

(7) St. Sabas refused to pray for a son of Theodora, lest he should prove a
heretic worse than Anastasius

himself. (Cyril, in Vit. St. Saba:, apud Aleman. p. 70. 109.)

(8) See John Malala, torn. ii. p. 174. Theophanes, p. 158. Procopius de
Edific. lib. v. c. 3.)

(9) Theodora Chalcedonensis synodi inimica canceris plaga toto corpore perfusa
vitam prodigiose finivit

(Vietor Tununensis in Chron.) On such occasions, an orthodox mind is steeled
against pity. Alamannus (p.

12,13.) understands the etwB3*>c xxaiprfu of Theophanes as civil language,
which does not imply either piety or

tepemaneej yet two yean after her death, St. Theodora is celebrated by Paul
Silemiarius. (in Proem, v. 55-61.

Vol. III. 2

