80 THE DECLINE AND FALL

was saved and dismissed by the compassion of a veteran general; and this act
of

humanity, which was revealed by his son, overbalanced the merit of reducing

twelve nations to the obedience of Persia. The zeal and prudence of Mebodes

had fixed the diadem on the head of Chosroes himself; but he delayed to attend

the royal summons, till he had performed the duties of a military review: he
was

instantly commanded to repair to the iron tripod, which stood before the gate
of

thepalace.(l) where it was death to relieve or approach the victim; and
Mebodes

languished several days before his sentence was pronounced, by the inflexible

pride and calm ingratitude of the son of Kobad. But the people, more
especially

in the east, are disposed to forgive, and even to applaud, the cruelty which
strikes

at the loftiest heads: at the slaves of ambition, whose voluntary choice has
ex­

posed them to live in the smiles, and to perish by the frown, of a capricious
mo­

narch. In the execution of the laws which he had no temptation to violate; in

the punishment of crimes which attacked his own dignity, as well as the hap­

piness of individuals; Nushirvan, or Chosroes, deserved the appellation of
just.

His government was firm, rigorous, and impartial. It was the first labour of
his

reign to abolish the dangerous theory of common or equal possessions: the
lands

and women which the sectaries of Mazdak had usurped, were restored to their

lawful owners; and the temperate chastisement of the fanatics or impostors
con­

firmed the domestic rights of society. Instead of listening with blind
confidence

to a favourite minister, he established four viziers over the four great
provinces of

his empire, Assyria, Media, Persia, and Bactriana. In the choice of judges,

prefects, and counsellors, he strove to remove the mask which is always worn

in the presence of kings; he wished to substitute the natural order ef talents
for

the accidental distinctions of birth and fortune; he professed, in specious
lan­

guage, his intention to prefer those men who carried the poor in their bosoms,

and to banish corruption from the seat of justice, as dogs were excluded from
the

temples of the Magi. The code of laws of the first Artaxerxes was revived and

published as the rule of the magistrates; but the assurance of speedy
punishment

was the best security of their virtue. Their behaviour was inspected by a

thousand eyes; their words were overheard by a thousand ears, the secret or

public agents of the throne; and the provinces, from the Indian to the Arabian

confines, were enlightened by the frequent visits of a sovereign, who affected
to

emulate his celestial brother in his rapid and salutary career. Education and
agri­

culture he viewed as the two objects most deserving of his care. In every city
of

Persia, orphans and the children of the poor were maintained and instructed at

the public expense; the daughters were given in marriage to the richest
citizens

of their own rank; and the sons, according to their different talents, were
em­

ployed in mechanic trades, or promoted to more honourable service. The desert­

ed villages were relieved by his bounty; to the peasants and farmers, who were

found incapable of cultivating their lands, he distributed cattle, seed, and
the in­

struments of husbandry; and the rare and inestimable treasure of fresh water
was

parsimoniously managed, and skilfully dispersed over the arid territory of
Per­

sia. (2) The prosperity of that kingdom was the effect and the evidence of his

virtues: his vices are those of oriental despotism; but in the long
competition be­

tween Chosroes and Justinian, the advantage both of merit and fortune is
almost

always on *he side of the barbarian. (3)

To the praise of justice, Nushirvan united the reputation of knowledge; and

the seven Greek philosophers, who visited this court, were invited and
deceived

by the strange assurance, that a disciple of Plato was seated on the Persian
throne.

Did they expect that a prince, strenuously exercised in the toils of war and
go­

vernment, should agitate, with dexterity like their own, the abstruse and
profound

questions which amused the leisure of the schools of Athens? Could they hope

that the precepts of philosophy should direct the life, and control the
passions, of

a despot, whose infancy had been taught to consider Ma absolute and
fluctuating

(1) Procopius,Persic.lib. i. e. 23. Brisson de Regn. Fen. p. 494. The frate of
the palace of Ispahan is, or

was. the fatal scene of disgrace or death. (Chardin, Voyage cn Perse, torn.
iv. p. 312,313.)

(2) In Persia, the prince of the waters is an officer of state. The number of
wells and subterraneous chan­

nels is much diminished,and with it the fertility of the soil: four hundred
wells have been recently lost near

Tauris, and forty-two thousand were once reckoned in the province of Khorasan
(Chardin, torn. iii. p. 99,100,

Tavernier, torn. i. p. 466.)

(3) The character and Kovernraent of Nushirvan isrepresented sometimes in the
words of d'Herbelot (Bibliot.

Orient.p. 680, &c. from Kbondemii-,) Eutyehius (Annal. torn. ii. p.
179,180.—very rich.) Abulpharagius (Uy-

iiast.yii.p.94,95.—very poor,) Tarikh Schikard (p. 144-150.,) Texeira (in
Stevens, lib. i. c. 35.,) Asseman.

(Bibhot, Orient, torn. iii. p. 404—410..) and the Abbe Fourmont (His* de
i'Acad. des Inscriptions, totps vik p.

f 2J-»314,,) who has translated a spurious of genuine testament of N usliii
vau.

