266 THE BECLINE AND PAIX

I

Roman name, declined the unlawful engagement, and boldly protested against the

adoption of a stranger. His patriotism was offensive to the emperor; but he
spoke

the sentiments of the people, and was removed from the royal presence by an
ho­

nourable banishment, a second command of the Cilician frontier, with the
absolute

disposal of the revenues of Cyprus. In this station, the Armenians again exer­

cised his courage, and exposed his negligence; and the same rebel, who baffled
all

his operations, was unhorsed and almost slain by the vigour of his lance. But

Andronicus soon discovered a more easy and pleasing conquest, the beautiful
Phi-

lippa, sister to the empress Maria, and daughter of Raymond of Poitou, the La­

tin prince of Antioch. For her sake, he deserted his station, and wasted the
sum­

mer in balls and tournaments: to his love she sacrificed her innocence, her
repu­

tation, and the offer of an advantageous marriage. But the resentment of Ma­

nuel for this domestic affront, interrupted his pleasures: Andronicus left the
indis­

creet princess to weep and to repent; and, with a band of desperate
adventurers,

undertook the pilgrimage of Jerusalem. His birth, his martial renown, and pro­

fessions of zeal, announced him as the champion of the cross; he soon
captivated

both the clergy and the king; and the Greek prince was invested with the lord­

ship of Berytus, on the coast of Phoenicia. In his neighbourhood resided a
young

and handsome queen of his own nation and family, great grand-daughter of the

emperor Alexis, and widow of Baldwin III. king of Jerusalem. She visited and

loved her kinsman. Theodora was the third victim of his amorous seduction; and

her shame was more public and scandalous than that of her predecessors. The

emperor still thirsted for revenge; and his subjects and allies of the Syrian
frontier,

were repeatedly pressed to seize the person, and put out the eyes, of the
fugitive.

In Palestine he was no longer safe; but the tender Theodora revealed his
danger

and accompanied his flight. The queen of Jerusalem was exposed to the east,

his obsequious concubine; and two illegitimate children were the living
monuments

of her weakness. Damascus was his first refuge; and, in the characters of the

great Noureddin and his servant Saladin, the superstitious Greek might learn
to

revere the virtues of the Mussulmans. As the friend of Noureddin, he visited

most probably Bagdad, and the courts of Persia; and, after a long circuit
round

the Caspian sea and the mountains of Georgia, he finally settled among the
Turks

of Asia Minor, the hereditary enemies of his country. The sultan of Colonia
af­

forded a hospitable retreat to Andronicus, his mistress, and his band of
outlaws;

the debt of gratitude was paid by frequent inroads in the Roman province of
Tre-

bizond; and he seldom returned without an ample harvest of spoil and of Chris­

tian captives. In the stoiy of his adventures, he was fond of comparing
himself

to David, who escaped, by a long exile, the snares of the wicked. But the
royal

prophet (he presumed to add) was content to lurk on the borders of Judaea, to
slay

an Amalekite, and to threaten, in his miserable state, the life of the
avaricious

Nabal. The excursions of the Comnenian prince had a wider range; and he had

spread over the eastern world the glory of his name and religion. By a
sentence

of the Greek church the licentious rover had been separated from the faithful;

but even this excommunication may prove, that he never abjured the profession

of Christianity.

His vigilance had eluded or repelled the open and secret persecution of the
em­

peror; but he was at length ensnared by the captivity of his female companion.

The governor of Trebizond succeeded in his attempt to surprise the person of

Theodora: the queen of Jerusalem and her two children were sent to Constanti­

nople, and their loss imbittered the tedious solitude of banishment. The
fugitive

implored and obtained a final pardon, with leave to throw himself at the feet
of

his sovereign, who was satisfied with the submission of this haughty spirit.
Pros­

trate on the ground, he deplored with tears and groans the guilt of his past
rebel­

lion; nor would he presume to arise unless some faithful subject would drag
him

to the foot of the throne, by an iron chain with which he had secretly
encircled

his neck. This extraordinary penance excited the wonder and pity of the assem­

bly; his sins were forgiven by the church and state; but the just suspicion of
Ma­

nuel fixed his residence at a distance from the court, at Oenoe, a town of
Pontus,

surrounded with rich vineyards, and situate on the coast of the Euxine. The

death of Manuel, and the disorders of the minority, soon opened the fairest
field

for his ambition. The emperor was a boy of twelve or fourteen years of age,

without vigour, or wisdom, or experience; his mother the empress Mary, aban­

doned her person and government to a favourite of the Comnenian name; and his

Sister, another Mary, whose husband, an Italian, was decorated with the title
of

