OF THE ROiMAN EMPIRE.

if the original title was deficient, she might be claimed, like other
moveables, by

the use and possession of an entire rear. The inclination of the Roman husband

discharged or withheld the conjugal debt, so scrupulously exacted by the
Athenian

and Jewish laws;(l) but as polygamy was unknown, he could never admit to his

bed a fairer or more favoured partner.

After the Punic triumphs, the matrons of Rome aspired to the common benefits

of a free and opulent republic: their wishes were gratified by the indulgence
of fa­

thers and lovers, and their ambition was unsuccessfully resisted by the
gravity of

Cato the censor. (2) They declined the solemnities of the old nuptials,
defeated the

annual prescription by an absence of three days, and, without losing their
name

or independence, subscribed the liberal and definite terms of a marriage
contract.

Of their private fortunes, they communicated the use, and secured the
property;

the estates of a wife could neither be alienated nor mortgaged by a prodigal
hus­

band; their mutual gifts were prohibited by the jealousy of the laws; ar.d the
mis­

conduct of either party might afford, under another name, a future subject for
an

action of theft. To this loose and voluntary compact, religious and civil
rights

were no longer essential; and between persons or a similar rank, the apparent

community of life was allowed as sufficient evidence of their nuptials. The
dig­

nity of marriage was restored by the Christians, who derived all spiritual
grace

from the prayers of the faithful and the benediction of the priest or bishop.
The

origin, validity, and duties of the holy institution, were regulated by the
tradition

of" the synagogue, the precepts of the gospel, and the canons of general or
pro­

vincial synods;(3) and the conscience of the Christians was awed by the
decrees

and censures of their ecclesiastical rulers. Yet the magistrates of Justinian
were

not subject to the authority of the church: the emperor consulted the
unbelieving

civilians of antiquity, and the choice of matrimonial laws in the Codes and
Pan­

dects, is directed by the earthly motives of justice, policy, and the natural
free­

dom of both sexes. (4)

Besides the agreement of the parties, the essence of every rational contract,

the Roman marriage required the previous approbation of the parents. A father

might be forced by some recent laws to supply the wants of a mature daughter;

but even his insanity was not generally allowed to supersede the necessity of
his

consent. The causes of the dissolution of matrimony have varied among the Ro-

mans;(5) but the most solemn sacrament, the confarreation itself, might always

be done away by rights of a contrary tendency. In the first ages, the father
of a

family might sell his children, and his wife was reckoned in the number of his

children: the domestic judge might pronounce the death of the offender, or his

mercy might expel her from his bed and house; but the slavery of the wretched

female was hopeless and perpetual, unless he asserted for his own convenience

the manly prerogative of divorce. The warmest applause has been lavished on

the virtue of the Romans, who abstained from the exercise of this tempting
pri­

vilege above five hundred years:(6) but the same fact evinces the unequal
terms

of a connexion in which the slave was unable to renounce her tyrant, and the
ty­

rant was unwilling to relinquish his slave. When the Roman matrons became the

equal and voluntary companions of their lords, a new jurisprudence was intro-

fl) Solon requires three payments per month. By the Misna, a daily debt was
imposed on an idle, vigorous:

young husband; twice a week on a eitizen; once on a peasant; once in thirty
days on a carael-di iver; once in

six months on a seaman. But the student or doctor was free from tribute; and
no wife, if she received a

weekly sustenance, could sue for divorce; for one week a vow of abstinence was
allowed. Polygamy divided,

without multiplying, the duties of the husband (Selden. Uxor. Ebraica, lib.
iii. e. 6. in his works, vol. ii. p.

717—HO.)

(2) On the Oppian law we may hear the mitigating speech of Valerias Flacous.
and the severe censorial ora­

tion of the elder Cato. (Liv. xxxiv. 1—8.) But we shall rather hear the
polished historian of the eighth, than

the rough orators of the sixth, century of Rome. The principles, and even the
style, of Cato are more accu­

rately preserved by Aulus Gellius (x. 33.)

(3) For the system of Jewish and catholic matrimony, see Selden (Uxor.
Ebraica, Opp. vol. ii. p. J»—S60. J

Bingham (Christian Antiquities, lib. xxii.,) and Chardon. (Hist, des
Sacremens, torn, vi.)

(4) The civil laws of marriage are exposed in the Institutes (lib. i. tit. x.
J the Pandects (lib. xxni—xxv.,) anil

the Code (lib. v.;) but as the title de ritu nuptiarum is vet imperfect, we
are obliged to explore the fragments of

tJlpian (tit. ix. p. 590,591.) and the Collalio Legura "Mosaicarum (tit. xvi.
p. 790, 791.,) with the notes of Fi-

thaeus and Schulting. They find, in the Commentary of Servius (on the first
Geoigio and the fourth jEneid,)

two curious passages.

(J) According to Plutarch (p. S7.,) Romulus allowed only three grounds of a
divorce—drunkenness,adulte­

ry, and false keys. Otherwise the husband who abused hu supremacy, forfeited
half his goods to the wife,

and half to the goddess Ceres, and offered a sacrifice (with the remainder) to
the terrestrial deities. This strange

law was either imaginary or transient.

(0) In the year of Rome 523, Spurius Carvilius Ruga repudiated a fair, a good,
but a barren wife (Dionrtia?,

Hal, lib. ii. p. 93. Plutarch in ICuma, p.141. Valerius Maximus, lib. ii. c.
1. Aulus Gellius, iv. 3.) He m is

questioned by the censors, and hated by the people; but his divorce stood
unimpeached in law.

Vot. III. 18

