OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 345

the Christian apostles St. Peter or St. Paul, could return to the Vatican,
they

might possibly inquire the name of the deity who is worshipped with such
myste­

rious rites in that magnificent temple: at Oxford or Geneva, they would expe­

rience less surprise: but it might still be incumbent on them to peruse the
cate­

chism of the church, and to study the orthodox commentators on their own

writings, and the words of their master. But the Turkish dome of St Sophia,

with an increase of splendour and size, represents the humble tabernacle
erected

at Medina by the hands of Mahomet. The Mahometans have uniformly withstood

the temptations of reducing the object of their faith and devotion to a level
with

the senses and imaginations of man. "I believe in one God, and Mahomet the

apostle of God," is the simple and invariable profession of Islam. The intel­

lectual image of the Deity has never been degraded by any visible idol; the
ho­

nours of the prophet have never transgressed the measure of human virtue; and

his living precepts have restrained the gratitude of his disciples within the
bounds

of reason and religion. The votaries of AH have indeed consecrated the memory

of their hero, his wife, and his children, and some of the Persian doctors
pretend

that the divine essence was incarnate in the person of the Imams; but their
super­

stition is universally condemned by the Sonnites; and their impiety has
afforded a

seasonable warning against the worship of saints and martyrs. The metaphysical

questions on the attributes of God, and the liberty of man, have been agitated
in

the schools of the Mahometans, as well as in those of the Christians; but
among the

former they have never engaged the passions of the people, or disturbed the
tran­

quillity of the state. The cause of this important difference may be found in
the

separation or union of the regal and sacerdotal characters. It was the
interest of

the caliphs, the successors of the prophet and commanders of the faithful to
re­

press and discourage all religious innovations: the order, the discipline, the
tem­

poral and spiritual ambition, of the clergy, are unknown to the Moslems: and
the

sages of the law are the guides of their conscience and the oracles of their
faith.

From the Atlantic to the Ganges, the Koran is acknowledged as the fundamental

code, not only of theology, but of civil and criminal jurisprudence: and the
laws

which regulate the actions and the property of mankind, are guarded by the in­

fallible and immutable sanction of the will of God. This religious servitude
is at­

tended with some practical disadvantage; the illiterate legislator had been
oftea

misled by his own prejudices and those of his country; and the institutions of
the

Arabian desert may be ill adapted to the wealth and numbers pf Ispahan and
Con­

stantinople. On these occasions, the cadhi respectfully places on his head the
holy

volume, and substitutes a dexterous interpretation more opposite to the
principles

of equity, and the manners and policy of the times.

His beneficial or pernicious influence on the public happiness is the last
conside­

ration in the character of Mahomet. The most bitter or most bigoted of his
Chris­

tian or Jewish foes, will surely allow that he assumed a false commission to
incul­

cate a salutary doctrine, less perfect only than their own. He piously
supposed,

as the basis of his religion, the truth, and sanctity of their prior
revelations, the

virtues and miracles of their founders. The idols of Arabia were broken before

the throne of God; the blood of human victims was expiated by prayer, and
fast­

ing, and alms, the laudable or innocent arts of devotion; and his rewards and
pun­

ishments of a future life were painted by the images most congenial to an
ignorant

or carnal generation. Mahomet was perhaps incapable of dictating a moral and

political system for the use of his countrymen: but he breathed among the
faithful

a spirit of charity and friendship, recommended the practice of the social
virtues,

and checked, by his laws and precepts, the thirst of revenge and the
oppression

of widows and orphans. The hostile tribes were united in faith and obedience,

and the valour which had been idly spent in domestic quarrels, was vigorously
di­

rected against a foreign enemy. Had the impulse been less powerful, Arabia,
free

at home, and formidable abroad, might have flourished under a succession of
her

native monarchs. Her sovereignty was lost by the extent and rapidity of
conquest.

The colonies of the nation were scattered over the east and west, and their
blood,

was mingled with the blood of their converts and captives. After the reign of

three caliphs, the throne was transported from Medina to the valley of
Damascus

and the banks of the Tigris; the holy cities were violated by impious war:
Arabia

was ruled by the rod of a subject, perhaps of a stranger; and the Bedoweens of
the

desert, awakening from their dream of dominion, resumed their old and solitary

independence. (1)

11) The vriten of the Modem TJnireml Hiitory (vol. t, and 20 have compiled, in
eight hundred and fifty

Vol. III. 44

