THE DECLINE AMD FALL

the house of Ommiyah. Before the accession to the throne, he had deserved, by

his Georgian warfare, the honourable epithet of the ass of Mes:>potamia;(l)
and

he might have been ranked among the greatest princes, had not, says Abulfeda,

the eternal order decreed that moment for the rum of his family; a decree
against

which all human prudence and fortitude must struggle in vain. The orders of
Mer-

van were mistaken or disobeyed: the return of his horse, from which he had
dis­

mounted on a necessary occasion, impressed the belief of his death; and the
en­

thusiasm of the black squadrons was ably conducted by Abdallah, the uncle of
his

competitor. After an irretrievable defeat, the caliph escaped to Mosul; but
the

colourB of the Abbassides were displayed from the rampart; he suddenly
repassed

the Tigri6, cast a melancholy look on his palace of Haran, crossed the Eu­

phrates, abandoned the fortifications of Damascus, and, without halting in
Pales­

tine, pitched his last and fatal camp at Busir on the banks of the Nile. (2)
His

speed was urged by the incessant diligence of Abdallah, who in every step of
the

pursuit acquired strength and reputation: the remains of the white faction
were

finally vanquished in Egypt; and the lance, which terminated the life and_
anxiety

of Mervan, was not less welcome perhaps to the unfortunate than to the
victorious

chief. The merciless inquisition of the conqueror eradicated the most distant

branches of the hostile race: their bones were scattered, their memory was ac­

cursed, and the martyrdom of Hossein was abundantly revenged cn the posterity

of his tyrants. Fourscore of the Ommiades, who had yielded to the faith or
cle­

mency of their foes, were invited to a banquet at Damascus. The laws of hospi­

tality were violated by a promiscuous massacre: the board was spread over
their

fallen bodies; and the festivity of the guests was enlivened by the music of
their

dying groans. By the event of the civil war the dynasty of the Abbassides was

firmly established; but the Christians only could triumph in the mutual hatred
and

common loss of the disciples of Mahomet. (3)

Yet the thousands who were swept away by the sword of war might have been

speedily retrieved in the succeeding generation, if the consequences of the
revolution

had not tended to dissolve the power and unity of the empire of the Saracens.
In

the proscription of the Ommiades, a royal youth of the name of Abdalrahman

alone escaped the rage of his enemies, who hunted the wandering exile from the

brinks of the Euphrates to the valleys of mount Atlas. Hispresence in the
neigh­

bourhood of Spain revived the zeal of the white faction. The name and cause of

the Abbassides had been first vindicated by the Persians; the west had. been

pure from civil arms; and the servants of the abdicated family still held, by
a pre­

carious tenure, the inheritance of their lands and the offices of government.

Strongly prompted by gratitude, indignation, and fear, they invited the
grandson

of the caliph Hashem to ascend the throne of his ancestors; and, in his
desperate

condition, the extremes of rashness and prudence were almost the same. The ac­

clamation of the people saluted his landing on the coast of Andalusia; and,
after a

successful struggle, Abdalrahman established the throne of Cordova, and was
the

father of the Ommiades of Spain, who reigned above two hundred and fifty years

from the Atlantic to the Pyrenees. (4) He slew in battle a lieutenant of the
Ab­

bassides, who had invaded his dominions with a fleet and army: the head of
Ala,

in salt and camphire, was suspended by a daring messenger before the palace of

Mecca; and the caliph Almansor rejoiced in his safety, that he was removed by

(1) Al Himan. He had been governor of Mesopotamia, and the Arabic proverb
praises the courage of that,

warlike breed of asses who never fly from an enemy. The surname of Mervan may
justify the comparison of

Homer, (Iliad, K 557, &c.) and both wilt silence the moderns, who consider the
ass as a stupid and ignoble em­

blem. (D'Herhelot, Dibliot. Orient, p. 458.)

(3) Tour several places, all in Egypt, bore the name of Bwir.or Rttsiris. so
famous in Greek fable. The tint,

where*Mervan was slain, was to the west of the Nile, in the province of Fium,
or Ar<inoe; the second in the

Delta, in the Sebennytic nome; the third, near the pyramid-*; the fourth,
which was destroyed by Diocletian,

in the Thebais. I shall here transcribe a note of the learned and orthodox
Michaelis: Vtdentur in pluribns

^Sgypti superioris urbibus Busiri Coptoquc anna sumpsisie Christiani,
Itbertatemque de religione sentitndt

defendisse; sed sucenbuisse quo in beilo Coptus et Busiris tlirula, et circa
Bsnam magna strages rdita. Bellntn

riarrant sed Catisam belli ignorant scriptons Byzamhu, alioqtii Coptuin t-t
Buisiriin non rebellasse dicturi, srd

caussam Christianorum suscepturi. (Not. 211. p. loo.) For the geography of the
four Busirs, see Abulfeda (de-

aeript. *gypt. p. 9. vers. Michaelis. Gottingse, 1770, in quarto,) Michaelis.
(Not. 132—137. p. 58—«3.) and

d'Anville. (Memoire sur l'Egypte, p. 82.147. 205.)

(3) See Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem, p. 136—145.) Eutychius, (Anna), torn. ii. p.
392. vers. Pocoek.) F.lmacin.

(Hist. Saracen, p. 109—121.) Abulpharagius.(Hist. Dynast, p. 134—140.)
Rodeilcof Toledo, (Hist. Arahum.c.

18. p. 33.) Theophanet, (Chronograph, p. 350,357. who speaks ofthe Abbassides
under the names of X *px<rx*>-

T*i and Maupae-cjwi,) and the Bihliotheque of d'Herbelot, in the articles of
Ommiades, Abbassides, Mervan

Ibrahim, Sa_ffah, Abori Moslem.

(4; For the revolution of Spain, consult Roderic of Toledo, (c 1 J. p. 84, &c)
the Biblrothec* Aiabico-ffis-

pana. torn. ii. p. 30. 198.) and Cardomjc. (Hilt, de PAfriqoe et de l'Espagne,
mm. i. p. 180—197. 20s. S"i

