SOS THE DECLINE AND FALL

privileges, of the Jews, who had multiplied to the number of forty thousand,
were

secured by the laws of the Caesars and Ptolemies, and a long proscription of
seven

hundred years since the foundation of Alexandria. Without any legal sentence,

without any royal mandate, the patriarch, at the dawn of day, led a seditious
mul­

titude to the attack of the synagogues. Unarmed and unprepared, the Jews were

incapable of resistance; their houses of prayer were levelled with the ground,
and

the episcopal warrior, after rewarding his troops with the plunder of their
goods,

expelled from the city the remnant of the unbelieving nation. Perhaps he might

plead the insolence of their prosperity, and their deadly hatred of the
Christians,

whose blood they had recently shed in a malicious or accidental tumult. Such

crimes would have deserved the animadversion of the magistrate; but in this
pro­

miscuous outrage the innocent were confounded with the guilty, and Alexandria

was impoverished by the loss of a wealthy and industrious colony. The zeal of

Cyril exposed him to the penalties of the Julian law; but in a feeble
government,

and a superstitious age, he was secure of impunity, and even of praise.
Orestes

complained; but his just complaints were too quickly forgotten by the
ministers of

Theodosius, and too deeply remembered by a priest who affected to pardon, and

continued to hate, the prefect of Egypt. As he passed through the streets, his

chariot was assaulted by a band of five hundred of the Nitrian monks; his
guards

fled from the wild beasts of the desert; his protestations, that he was a
Christian

and a catholic, were answered by a volley of stones, and the face of Orestes
was

covered with blood. The loyal citizens of /Alexandria hastened to his rescue;
he

instantly satisfied his justice and revenge against the monk, by whose hand he
had

been wounded, and Ammonius expired under the rod of the lictor. At the com­

mand of Cyril, his body was raised from the ground, and transported in solemn

procession, to the cathedral; the name of Ammonius was changed to that of
Thau-

masius the wonderful; his tomb was decorated with the trophies of martyrdom,

and the patriarch ascended the pulpit, to celebrate the magnanimity of an
assassin

and a rebel. Such honours might incite the faithful to combat and die under
the

banners of the saint: and he soon prompted, or accepted, the sacrifice of a
virgin,

who professed the religion of the Greeks, and cultivated the friendship of
Orestes.

Hypatia, the daughter of Theon the mathematician,(l) was initiated in her fa­

ther's studies: her learned comments have elucidated the geometry of
Apollonius

and Diophantus, and she publicly taught, both at Athens and Alexandria, the
phi­

losophy of Plato and Aristotle. In the bloom of beauty, and in the maturity of

wisdom, the modest maid refused her lovers and instructed her disciples; the
per­

sons most illustrious for their rank or merit were impatient to visit the
female phi­

losopher, and Cyril beheld, with jealous eye, the gorgeous train of horses and

slaves who crowded the door of her academy. A rumour was spread among the

Christians, that the daughter of Theon was the only obstacle to the
reconciliation

of the prefect and the archbishop; and that obstacle was speedily removed. On
a

fatal day, in the holy season of lent, Hypatia was torn from her chariot,
stripped

naked, dragged to the church, and inhumanly butchered by the hands of Peter

the reader, and a troop of savage and merciless fanatics: her flesh was
scraped

from her bones.with sharp oyster shells,(2) and her quivering limbs were
delivered

to the flames. The just progress of inquiry and punishment was stopped by sea­

sonable gifts; but the murder of Hypatia has imprinted an indelible stain on
the

character and religion of Cyril of Alexandria. (3)

Superstition, perhaps, would more gently expiate the blood of a virgin, than

the banishment of a saint; and Cyril had accompanied his uncle to the
iniquitous

synod of the oak. When the memory of Chrysostom was restored and consecra­

ted, the nephew of Theophilus, at the head of a dying faction, still
maintained

the justice of his sentence; nor was it till after a tedious delay, and an
obstinate re-

;i) For Theon,and his daughter Hypatia, see Fabricius, Bibliothec.tom. viii.
n.210, 311. Her article m

the Lexicon of Suidas is curious and original. Hesychius (Meursii Opera, torn.
vii. p. 295,290.) observes, that

siie was prosecuted Six thv vjre?2>n\hwtrxv o-oQixv; and an epigram in the
Greek Anthology (Ub. i. c. 76. p.

159. edit. Broilsei) celebrates her knowledge and eloquence. She is honourably
mentioned (Epist. 10.15,16 .

33—80. 121. 135.153.) by her friend and disciple the philosophic bishop
Synerius.

(2) OTTpeticoi,- aiviiXer, x*i/isxtiScv, Sjattrwao-MiTfs, &c. Oyster-shells
were plentifully strewed on the sea-beach

before the Csesareum. I may therefore prefer the literal tense, without
rejecting the metaphorical version of

"teguUe, tiles, which is used by M. de Valois. I am ignorant, and the
assassins were probably regardless, whe­

ther their victim was yet alive.

(3) These exploits of St. Cyril are recorded by Socrates; (lib. vii. e. 13—15,
and the most reluctant bigotry

is compelled to copy an historian who coolly styles the murderers of Hypatia
«u5p;; to srpevitp* tv^ifftu. At

,Ji T,™'.!?? of that '"j"1*11 name, I am pleased to observe a blush even on
the cheek of Baronius. (A. D.

