OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 23

of ground, they obtained the most exhorbitant terms from the eager desires and

timorous conscience of the monarch. Anthemius formed the design, and his ge­

nius directed the hands of ten thousand workmen, whose payment in pieces of
fine

silver was never delayed beyond the evening. The emperorhimself clad in a li­

nen tunic, surveyed each day their rapid progress, and encouraged their
diligence

by his familiarity, his zeal, and his rewards. The new cathedral of St. Sophia

was consecrated by the patriarch, five years, eleven months and ten days from
the

first foundation; and, in the midst of the solemn festival, Justinian
exclaimed with

devout vanity, " Glory be to God, who hath thought me worthy to accomplish so

great a work: I have vanquished thee, O Solomon!"(l) But the pride of the Ro­

man Solomon, before twenty years had elapsed, was humbled by an earthquake,

•which overthrew the eastern part of the dome. Its splendour was again
restored

by the perseverance of the same prince; and, in the thirty-sixth year of his
reign,

Justinian celebrated the second dedication of a temple, which remains, after
twelve

centuries, a stately "monument of his fame. The architecture of St. Sophia,

which is now converted into the principal mosch, has been imitated by the
Turk­

ish sultans, and that venerable pile continues to excite the fond admiration
of the

Greeks, and the more rational curiosity of European travellers. The eye of the

spectator is disappointed by an irregular prospect of half domes and shelving

roofs: the western front, the principal approach, is destitute of simplicity
and

magnificence: and the scale of dimensions has been much surpassed by several
of

the Latin cathedrals. But the architect, who first erected an aerial cupola,
is en­

titled to the praise of bold design and skilful execution. The dome of St.
Sophia,

illuminated by four and twenty windows, is formed with so small a curve, that
the

depth is equal only to one-sixth of its diameter; the measure of that diameter
is

one hundred and fifteen feet, and the lofty centre, where a crescent has
supplant­

ed the cross, rises to the perpendicular height of one hundred and eighty feet
above

the pavement. The circle, which encompasses the dome, lightly reposes on four

strong arches, and their weight is firmly supported by four massy piles, whose

strength is assisted on the northern and southern sides by four columns of
Egyp­

tian granite. A Greek cross, inscribed in a quadrangle, represents the form of

the edifice; the exact breadth is two hundred and forty-three feet, and two
hun­

dred and sixty-nine may be assigned for the extreme length from the sanctuary

in the east to the nine western doors which open in the vestibule, and from
thence

into the narthex, or exterior portico. That portico was the humble station of
the

penitents. The nave or body of the church was filled by the congregation of
the

faithful; but the two sexes were prudently distinguished, and the upper and
lower

galleries were allotted for the more private devotion of the women. Beyond the

northern and southern piles, a balustrade, terminated on either side by the
thrones,

of the emperor and the patriarch, divided the nave from the choir: and the
space,

as far as the, steps of the altar, was occupied by the clergy and singers. The
al­

tar itself, a name which insensibly became familiar to Christian ears, was
placed

in the eastern recess, artificially built in the form of a demi-cylinder; and
this

sanctuary communicated by several doors with the sacristy, the vestry, the
bap­

tistery, and the contiguous buildings, subservient either to the pomp of
worship,

or the private use of the ecclesiastical ministers. The memory of past
calamities

, inspired Justinian with a wise resolution, that no wood, except for the
doors,

should be admitted into the new edifice; and the choice of the materials was
ap­

plied to the strength, the lightness, or the splendour of the respective
parts.

The solid piles, which sustained the cupola, were composed of huge blocks of

freestone, hewn into squares and triangles, fortified by circles of iron, and
firmly

cemented by the infusion of lead and quick lime: but the weight of the cupola

was diminished by the levity of its substance, which consists either of
pumice-

stone, that floats in the water, or of bricks from the isle of Rhodes, five
times less

ponderous than the ordinary sort. The whole frame of the edifice was
construct­

ed of brick; but those base materials were concealed by a crust of marble; and

the inside of St. Sophia, the cupola, the two larger, and the six smaller
semi-

domes, the walls, the hundred columns, and the pavement, delight even the eyes

of barbarians with a rich and variegated picture. A poet,(2) who beheld the

(l) Solomon's temple was surrounded with courts, porticos, &c, but the proper
structure of the house of

God, was no more (if we take the Egyptian or Hebrew cubit at twenty-two
inches) than fifty-five feet in,

height, thirty-six and two thirds in breadth, and one hundred and ten in
length—a small parish church, says,

Prideaux; (Connex. vol. i. p. 144, folio) but few sanctuaries could be valued
atfour or five millions sterling!

(3) Paul Silentiarius, in dark and poetic language, describes the various
stones and marbles that were em-,

ployed in the edifice of St. Sophia. P. 2. p. 129.133. &c. Ecc.) 1. The
Carytticn—pale, with iron veins. J. The;

