OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 27

and rapine. The most successful princes respected the strength of the
mountains

and the despair of the natives; their fierce spirit was sometimes toothed with

gifts, and sometimes restrained by terror; and a military count, with three
legions,

fixed his permanent and ignominious station in the heart of the Roman
provinces,(1J

But no sooner was the vigilance of power relaxed or diverted, than the light-
armed

squadrons descended from the hills, and invaded the peaceful plenty of Asia.
Al­

though the Isaurians were not remarkable for stature or bravery, want rendered

them bold, and experience made them skilful in the exercise of predatory war.
They

advanced with secrecy and speed to the attack of villages and defenceless
towns;

their flying parties have sometimes touched the Hellespont, the Euxine, and
the

gates of Tarsus, Antioch, or Damascus;(2) and the spoil was lodged in their
inaccessi­

ble mountains, before the Roman troops had received their orders, or the
distant pro­

vince had computed its loss. The guilt of rebellion and robbery excluded them
from

the rights of national enemies; and the magistrates were instructed by an,
edict,

that the trial or punishment of an Isaurian, even on the festival of Easter,
was a

meritorious act of justice and piety. (3) If the captives were condemned to
domes­

tic slavery, they maintained, with their sword or dagger, the private quarrel
of their

masters; and it was found expedient for the public tranquillity, to prohibit
the ser­

vice of such dangerous retainers. When their countryman I'arcalissseus or Zeno

ascended the throne, he invited a faithful and formidable band of Isaurians,
who in­

sulted the court and city, and were rewarded by an annual tribute of five
thousand

pounds of gold. But the hopes of fortune depopulated the mountains, luxury
ener­

vated the hardiness of their minds and bodies, and in proportion as they mixed
with

mankind, they became less qualified for the enjoyment of poor and solitary
free­

dom. After the death of Zeno, his successor Anastasius suppressed their
pensions,

exposed their persons to the revenge of the people, banished them from
Constanti­

nople, and prepared to sustain a war, which left only the alternative of
victory or

servitude. A brother of the last emperor usurped the title of Augustus; his
cause

was powerfully supported by the arms, the treasures, and the magazines,
collected

by Zeno; and the native Isaurians must have formed the smallest portion of the

hundred and fifty thousand barbarians under his standard, which was
sanctified, for

the first time, by the presence of a fighting bishop. Their disorderly numbers

were vanquished in the plains of Phrygia by the valour and discipline of the
Goths;

but a war of six years almost exhausted the courage of the emperor. (4) The
Isau­

rians retired to their mountains; their fortresses were successively besieged
and

ruined; their communication with the sea was intercepted; the bravest of their
lead­

ers died in arms; the surviving chiefs, before their execution, were dragged
in

chains through the hippodrome; a colony of their youth was transplanted into

Thrace, and the remnant of the people submitted to the Roman government. Yet

some generations elapsed before their minds were reduced to the level of
slavery.

The populous villages of mount Tauris were filled with horsemen and archers;

they resisted the imposition of tributes, but they recruited the armies of
Justinian;

and his cwilmagistrates, the proconsul of Cappadocia, the count of Isauria,
and the

prsetor^ of Lycaonia and Pisidia, were invested with military power to
restrain the

licentious practice of rapes and assassinations. (5)

If we .extend our view from the tropic to the mouth of the Tanais we may ob­

serve on one hand, the precautions of Justinian to curb the savages of
Ethiopia, (6)

and on the other, the long walls which he constructed in Crimea for the
protection

of his friendly Goths, a colony of three thousand shepherds and warriors. (7)
From

(1) Trebellius Pollio in Hist. August, p. 107. who tired under Diocletian, or
Conslantine. See likewise Pan-

cirolus, ad Not. Imp. Orient, c. lis. 141. See Cod. Theodos. lib. xi. tit. 35.
leg. 37. with a copious collective

Annotation of Godefroy, torn. iii. p. 256.257.

(2) See the full and wide extent of their inroads in Philostorgius (Hist.
Eccles. lib. ii. e. 8.,) with Godefroy's

learned Dissertations.

(3) Cod. Justinian, lib. ix. tit. 12. leg. 10. The punishments are severe—a
fine of a hundred pounds of gold,

degradation, and even death. The public peace might afford a pretence, but
Zeno was desirous of monopo­

lizing the valour and service of the Isaurians.

(4) The Isaurian war and the triumph of Anastasius are briefly and darkly
represented by John Malala [torn,

ii. p. 106,107.;) Evagrius (lib. iii. c. 35.;) Theophanes (p. 118—120.;) and
the Chronicle of Marcellinus.

(5) Fortes ea regio (says Justinian) viros habel, nec in ullo differt ab
Isauria, though Procopius (Persic lib. i.

c. 13.^ marks an essential difference between their military character; yet in
former times the Lycaonians and

Pisuham had defended their liberty against the great king (Xenophon, Anabasis,
lib. iii. c. 2.) Justinian in­

troduces some false and ridiculous erudition of the ancient empire of the
Pisidians, and the Lycaonians, who,

after visiting Rome (long before iEneas,) gave a name and people to Lycaonia
(Novell. 24,25. 27. 30.)

(6) See Procopius, Persic, lib. i. c. 19. The altar of national concord, of
annual sacrifice and oaths, which

Diocletian had erected in the isle of Elephantine, was demolished by Justinian
with less policy than zeal.

(7) Procopius de Edificiis, lib. iii. c. 7. Hist. lib. viii. c. 3,4. These
unambitious Goths had refused to fol­

low the standard of Theodoric. As late as the fifteenth and sixteenth century,
the name and nation might be

discovered between Cafiaand the straits of Azepli
(d'AnvilleMenioiresderAcademie, torn. xxx. p. 240.) They

well deserved the curiosity of Busbequius (p. 321—326.;) but seem to have
vanished in the more recent ae-

■ecunt of the Missions du Levant (torn, i.,) Tott Peyssoncl, &c.

