QF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 19

indulgence; and many of his subjects have renounced the possession of those
lands,

■whose value is insufficient to satisfy the demands of the treasury. To the
cities

which had suffered by hostile inroads, Anastasius promised a general exemption

of seven years; the provinces of Justinian have been ravaged by the Persians
and

Arabs, the Huns and Sclavonians; but his vain and ridiculous dispensation of a

single year has been confined to those places which were actually taken by the

enemy." Such is the language of the secret historian, who expressly denies
that

any indulgence was granted to Palestine after the revolt of the Samaritans; a
false

and odious charge, confuted by the authentic record, which attests a relief of

thirteen centenaries of gold (52,000/.,) obtained for that desolate province
by the

intercession of St. Sabas.(l) III. Procopius has not condescended to explain
the

system of taxation, which fell like a hail-storm upon the land, like a
devouring

pestilence on its inhabitants; but we should become the accomplices of his
malig­

nity, if we imputed to Justinian alone, the ancient though rigorous principle,
that

a whole district should be condemned to sustain the partial loss of the
persons or

property of individuals. The Anona, or supply of corn for the use of the army

and capital, was a grievous and arbritrary exaction, which exceeded, perhaps
in

a tenfold proportion, the ability of the farmer; and his distress was
aggravated by

the partial injustice of weights and measures, and the expense and labour of
dis­

tant carriage. In a time of scarcity, an extraordinary requisition was made to
the

adjacent provinces of Thrace, Bithynia, and Phrygia; but the proprietors,
after a

wearisome journey and a perilous navigation, received so inadequate a
compensa­

tion, that they would have chosen the alternative of delivering both the corn
and

price at the doors of their granaries. These precautions might indicate a
tender

solicitude for the welfare of the capital; yet Constantinople did not escape
the

rapacious despotism of Justinian. Till his reign, the straits of the Bosphorus
and

Hellespont were open to the freedom of trade, and nothing was prohibited
except

the exportation of arms for the service of the barbarians. At each of these
gates

of the city, a pretor was stationed, the minister of imperial avarice; heavy
customs

were imposed on the vessels and their merchandise; the oppression was
retaliated

on the helpless consumer; the poor were afflicted by the artificial scarcity,
and ex­

orbitant price of the market; and a people, accustomed to depend on the
liberality

of their prince, might sometimes complain of the deficiency of water and
bread. (2j

The aerial tribute, without a name, a law, or a definite object, was an annual
gift

of 120,000/. which the emperor accepted from his pretorian prefect; and the

means of payment were abandoned to the discretion of that powerful magistrate.

IV. Even such a tax was less intolerable than the privilege of monopolies,
which

checked the fair competition of industry, and, for the sake of a small and
dishonest

gain, imposed an arbitrary burden on the wants and luxury of the subject. " As

soon," (1 transcribe the anecdotes) " as the exclusive sale of silk was
usurped by

the imperial treasurer, a whole people, the manufacturers of Tyre and Berytus,

was reduced to extreme misery, and either perished with hunger, or fled to the

hostile dominions of Persia." A province might suffer by the decay of its
manu­

factures; but in this example of silk, Procopius has partially overlooked the
inesti­

mable and lasting benefit which the empire received from the curiosity of
Justi­

nian. His addition of one-seventh to the ordinary price of copper-money may be

interpreted with the same candour; and the alteration, which might be wise,
ap­

pears to have been innocent; since he neither alloyed the purity nor enhanced
the

value, of the gold coin, (3) the legal measure of public and private payments.
V.

The ample jurisdiction, required by the farmers of the revenue to accomplish

their engagements, might be placed in an odious light, as if they had
purchased

from the emperor the lives and fortunes of their fellow-citizens. And a more
di-

- rect sale of honours and offices was transacted in the palace, with the permission,  
or at least with the connivance, of Justinian and Theodora. The claims of
merit,

even those of favour, were disregarded, and it was almost reasonable to
expect,

• that the bold adventurer, who had undertaken the trade of a magistrate,
should

find a rich compensation for infamy, labour, danger, the debts which he had
con-

(1) One to Scythopolts, capital of the second Palestine, and twelve for the
rest of the province. Airman, (p.

-59.) honestly produces this fact from a MS. life of St. Sabas, by his disciple Cyril, in the Vatican library, and  
since published by Coteterius.

(2) John Malala (torn, it p. 232.) mentions the want of bread, and Zonaras
(lib. xiv. p. fi3.) the leaden pipes,

which Justinian, or his servants, stole from the aqueducts.

(3) For an aureus, one-sixth of an ounce of gold, instead of two hundred and
ten, he e^ve no more than one

hundred and eighty folles, or ounces of copper. A disproportion of the mint,
below the market price, must

have soon produced a scarcity of small money. In Eue/laml. twelve pence m
copper would sell for no more

than leven pence. (Smith's Inquiry into the Wealth of Nations, vol. i. p. 490
For Justinian's gold coin, see

Eyngrius (lib. iv. c. 30.)

