OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 139-

■stripped of her wealth and ornaments, without excepting the bodkin of her
hair:

if a man introduced a new bride into his bed, her fortune might be lawfully
seized

by the vengeance of his exiled wife. Forfeiture was sometimes commuted to a

fine; the fine was sometimes aggravated by transportation to an island, or
impri­

sonment in a monastery: the injured party was released from the bonds of mar­

riage; but the offender, during life or a term of years, was disabled from {he
re­

petition of nuptials. The successor of Justinian yielded to the prayers of his

unhappy subjects, and restored the liberty of divorce by mutual consent: the

civilians were unanimous,(l) the theologians were divided,(2) and the
ambiguous

word, which contains the precepts of Christ, is flexible to any interpretation
that

the wisdom of a legislator can demand.

The freedom of love and marriage was restrained among the Romans by natu­

ral and civil impediments. An instinct, almost innate and universal, appears
to

prohibit the incestuous commerce(3) of parents and children in the infinite
series

of ascending and descending generations. Concerning the oblique and collateral

branches nature is indifferent, reason mute, and custom various and arbitrary.
In

Egypt, the marriage of brothers and sisters was admitted without scruple or
ex­

ception: a Spartan might espouse the daughter of his father, an Athenian that
of

his mother; and the nuptials of an uncle with his niece was applauded at
Athens

as a happy union of the dearest relations. The profane lawgivers of Rome were

never tempted by interest or superstition to multiply the forbidden degrees:
but

they inflexibly condemned the marriage of sisters and brothers, hesitated
whether

first cousins should be touched by the same interdict: revered the parental
cha­

racter of aunts and uncles, and treated affinity and adoption as a just
imitation of

the ties of blood. According to the proud maxims of the republic, a legal mar­

riage could only be contracted by free citizens; an honourable, at least an
ingenu­

ous, birth was required for the spouse of a senator: but the blood of kings
could

never mingle in legitimate nuptials with the blood of a Roman; and the name of

Stranger degraded Cleopatra and Berenice, (4) to live the concubines of Mark
An­

tony and Titus. (5) This appellation, indeed, so injurious to the majesty,
cannot

without indulgence be applied to the manners, of these oriental queens. A con­

cubine, in the strict sense of the civilians, was a woman of servile or
plebeian ex­

traction, the sole and faithful companion of a Roman citizen, who continued in
a

state of celibacy. Her modest station below the honours of a wife, above the
in­

famy of a prostitute, was acknowledged and approved by the laws: from the age

of Augustus to the tenth century, the use of this secondary marriage prevailed

both in the west and east, and the humble virtues of a concubine were often
pre­

ferred to the pomp and insolence of a noble matron. In this connexion, the two

Antonines, the best of princes and of men, enjoyed the comforts of domestic
love;

the example was imitated by many citizens impatient of celibacy, but regardful

of their families. If at any time they desired to legitimate their natural
children,

the conversion was instantly performed by the celebration of their nuptials
with a

partner, whose fruitfulness and fidelity they had already tried. By this
epithet of

natural, the offspring of the concubine were distinguished from the spurious
blood

of adultery, prostitution, and incest, to whom Justinian reluctantly grants
the ne­

cessary aliments of life; and these natural children alone were capable of
succeed­

ing to a sixth part of the inheritance of their reputed father. According to
the

rigour of the law, bastards were entitled only to the name and condition of
their

mother, from whom they might derive the character of a slave, a stranger, or a

(1) The Institutes are silent,"but we may_ consult the Codes of Theodosius
(lib. iii. tit. rri. with Godefrov*s

Commentary, torn. i. p. 310—313.) and Justinian (lib. v. tit. xvii.,) the
Pandects (lib. xxiv. tit. ii.,) and the No­

vels (22. 117. 127.134.140.) Justinian fluctuated to the last between civil
and ecclesiastical law.

(2) In pure Greek, m^nx is not a common word; nor can the proper meaning/,
fornication, be strictly ap­

plied to matrimonial sin. In a figurative sense, how far, and to what
offences, may it be extended ? Ditl

Christ speak the Rabbinical or Syriac tongue ? Of what original word is
vopvsix the translation ? How vari­

ously is that Greek word translated in the versions ancient and modern ! There
are two (Mark x. 11. Luke

xvi. IS.) to one (Matthew xix. 9.) that such ground of divorce was not
excepted by Jesus. Some critics have

presumed to think, by an evasive answer, he avoided the giving offence either
to the school of Sammai or

that of Hillel (Selden, Uxor. Ebraica, lib. iii. c. IS—22. 23. 31.)

(3) The principles of the Roman jurisprudence are exposed by Justinian
(Institut. lib. i. tit. 10.,) and the laws

and manners of the different nations of antiquity concerning forbidden
degrees, &e. are copiously explained

by Dr. Taylor in his Elements of civil law (p. 108. 314—330.,) a work of
amusing, though various, reading;

but which cannot be praised for philosophical precision.

(4) When her father Agrippa died (A. D. 44.,) Berenice was sixteen years of
age .(Joseph, torn. i. Antiqnif.

Judaic, lib. xix. c. 9. p. 952. edit, Havercamp.) She was therefore above
fifty years old when Titus (A. D. 79.)

invitus invitam invisir. This date would not have adorned the tragedy or
pastoral of the tender Racine.

(5) The iCgyptia conjonx of Virgil (£taeid. 8.688.) seems to be numbered among
the monsters ivlio warred

with, Mark Antony against Augustus, the senate, and the gods of Italy.

