234. THE DECLINE AND FALL

the Nubians at length executed their threats of returning to the worship of
idols j

the climate required the indulgence of polygamy, and they have finally
preferred

the triumph of the koran to the abasement of the cross. A metaphysical
religion

may appear too refined for the capacity of the negro race: yet a black or a
parrot

might be taught to repeat the -words of the Chalcedon or Monophysite creed.

Christianity was more deeply rooted in the Abyssinian empire; and, although

the correspondence has been sometimes interrupted above seventy or a hundred

years, the mother-church of Alexandria retains her colony in a state of
perpetual

pupilage. Seven bishops once composed the Ethiopic synod: had their number

amounted to ten, they might have elected an independent primate; and one of
their

kings was ambitious of promoting his brother to the ecclesiastical throne. But

the event was foreseen, the increase was denied; the episcopal office has been

gradually confined to the abuna,(l) the head and author of the Abyssinian
priest­

hood; the patriarch supplies each vacancy with an Egyptian monk; and the cha­

racter of a stranger appears more venerable in the eyes of the people, less
dan­

gerous in those of the monarch. In the sixth century, when the schism of Egypt

was confirmed, the rival chiefs, with their patrons, Justinian and Theodora,
strove

to outstrip each other in the conquest of a remote and independent province.
The

industry of the empress was again victorious, and the pious Theodora haB esta-

lished in that sequestered church the faith and discipline of the Jacobites.
(2)

Encompassed on all sides by the enemies of their religion, the Ethiopians
slept

near a thousand years, forgetful of the world, by whom they were forgotten.

They were awakened by the Portuguese, who, turning the southern promontory

of Africa, appeared in India and the Red Sea, as if they had descended through

the air from a distant planet. In the first moments of their interview, the
subjects

of Rome and Alexandria observed the resemblance, rather than the difference of

their faith; and each nation expected the most important benefits from an
alliance

with their Christian brethren. In their lonely situation, the Ethiopians had
almost

relapsed into the savage life.. Their vessels, which had traded to Ceylon,
scarcely

presumed to navigate the rivers of Africa; the ruins of Axume were deserted,
the

nation was scattered in villages, and the emperor (a pompous name) was
content,

both in peace and war, with the immoveable residence of a camp. Conscious of

their own indigence, the Abyssinians had formed the rational project of
importing

the arts and ingenuity of Europe;(3) and their ambassadors at Rome and Lisbon

were instructed to solicit a colony of smiths, carpenters, tilers, masons,
printers,

surgeons, and physicians, for the use of their country. But the public danger
soon

called for the instant and effectual aid of arms and soldiers to defend an
unwarlike

people from the barbarians who ravaged the inland country, and the Turks and

Arabs who advanced from the sea-coast in more formidable array. Ethiopia was

saved by four hundred and fifty Portuguese, who displayed in the field the
native

valour of the Europeans, and the artificial powers of musket and cannon. In a

moment of terror, the emperor hadSpromised to reconcile himself and his
subjects

to the catholic faith; a Latin patriarch represented the supremacy of the
pope;(4)

the empire, enlarged in a tenfold proportion, was supposed to contain more
gold

than the mines of America; and the wildest hopes of avarice and seal were
built

on the willing submission of the Christians of Africa.

But the vows which pain had extorted, were foresworn on the return of health.

The Abyssinians still adhered with unshaken constancy to the Monophysite
faith;

their languidi belief was inflamed by the exercise of dispute; they branded
the

ffie name of the Nubian geographer (p. 18..) who represents them as a nation
of Jacobites. The rays of histo­

rical light that twinkle in the history of Renaudot (p. 178. 820.224. 281.
288. 405. 434. 451. 464.,) are all pre­

vious to this era. See the modern state in the Lettres Edificantes (Recueil
iv. J and Busching (torn. is. p.

152—159 par Berenger.)

(1) The abuna is improperly dignified by the Latins with the title of
patriarch. The Abyssinians acknow­

ledge only the four patriarchs, and their chief is no more tban a
metropolitan, or national primate (Ludolph.

Hist. Athiopic. et Comment, lib. iii. c. Tii.) The seven bishops of Renaudot
(p. 511.,) who existed A. D. 1131,

are unknown to the historian.

(2) I know not why Assemannns (Ribliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 384.) should call
in question these probable mis-

aions of Theodora into Nubia and ^Ethiopia. The slight notices of Abyssinia
till the year 1500 are supplied by

Renaudot, CP; 330. 341,381.382. 405. 443, fee. 452. 456. 463.475. 480.
511.525. 559. 564.) from the Coptic wri­

ters. The mind of Ludolphus was a perfect blank.

{3) Ludolph. Hist. ACthiop. lib. iv. c. 5. The most necessary arts are now
exercised by the Jews, and the fo­

reign trade is in the hands of the Armenians. What Gregory principallv admired
and envied was the indus­

try of Europe—nrtes et opificia.

(4) John Bermudez, whose relation, printed at Lisbon, 1569, was translated
into Englhh by Purchas, (Pil­

grims, lib. viL c. 7.1149, &e.) and from thence into French by La Croze
(Christianisme d'dEthiope. p. 93—

265.) The piece i» curious; but the author may be suspected of deceiving
Abyssinia, Rome and PortaKul-

Hh title to the rank of patriarch is dark and doubtful (Ludolph. Comment. No.
ML p. 473.)-

