OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, 259

and gratitude. After their defeat, the fears of the emperor solicited a
treaty,

which was almost accepted by the moderation of the Comnenian. But the former

was betrayed by his ambassadors, and the latter was prevented by his friends.

The solitary Michael submitted to the voice of the people; the patriarch
annulled

their oath of allegiance; and as he shaved the head of the royal monk, congra­

tulated his beneficial exchange of temporal royalty for the kingdom of heaven:
an

exchange, however, which the priest, on his own account, would probably have

declined. By the hands of the same patriarch, Isaac Comnenus was solemnly

crowned: the sword which he inscribed on his coins, might be an offensive
symbol,

it it implied his title by conquest; but this sword would have been drawn
against

the foreign and domestic enemies of the state- The decline of his health and
vi­

gour suspended the operation of active virtue; and the prospect of approaching

death determined him to interpose some moments between life and eternity. But

instead of leaving the empire as the marriage portion of his daughter, his
reason

and inclination concurred in the preference of his brother John, a soldier, a
pa­

triot, and the father of five sons, the future pillars of an hereditary
succession.

His first nicest reluctance might be the natural dictates of discretion and
tender­

ness, but his obstinate and successful perseverance, however it may dazzle
with

the show of virtue, must be censured as a criminal desertion of his duty, and
a

rare offence against his family and countiy. The purple which he had refused

was accepted by Constantine Ducas, a friend of the Comnenian house, and whose

noble birth was adorned with the experience and reputation of civil policy. In

the monastic habit, Isaac recovered.his health, and survived two years his
volun­

tary abdication. At the command of his abbot, he observed the rule of St.
Basil,

and executed the most servile offices of the convent; but his latent vanity
was gra­

tified by the frequent and respectful visits of the reigning monarch, who
revered

in his person the character of a benefactor and a saint.

If Constantine XI. were indeed the subject most worthy of empire, we must pity

the debasement of the age and nation in which he was chosen. In the labour of

puerile declamations he sought, without obtaining, the crown of eloquence,
more

precious, in his opinion, than that of Rome; and, in the subordinate functions
of a

judge, he forgot the duties of a sovereign and a warrior. Far from imitating
the

patriotic indifference of the authors of his greatness, Ducas was anxious only
to se­

cure, at the expense of the republic, the power and prosperity of his
children.

His three sons, Michael VII. Andronicus I. and Constantine XII. were invested,

in a tender age, with the equal title of Augustus; and the succession was
speedily

opened by their father's death. His widow, Eudocia, was intrusted with .the
ad­

ministration; but experience had taught the jealousy of the dying monarch to
pro­

tect his sons from the danger of her second nuptials; and her solemn
engagement,

attested by the principal senators, was deposited in the hands of the
patriarch.

Before the end of seven months, the wants of Eudocia, or those of the state,
called

aloud for the male virtues of a soldier; and her heart had already chosen
Roma-

nus Diogenes, whom she raised from the scaffold to the throne. ' The discovery

of a treasonable attempt had exposed hinVto the severity of the laws: his
beauty

and valour absolved him in the eyes of the empress; and Romanus, from a mild

exile, was recalled on the second day to the command of the oriental armies.
Her

royal choice was yet unknown to the public, and the promise which would have

betrayed her falsehood and levity, was stolen by a dexterous emissary from the

ambition of the patriarch. Xiphilin at first alleged the sanctity of oaths and
the

sacred, nature of a trust; but a whisper that his brother was the future
emperor,

relaxed his scruples, and forced him to confess that the public safety was the
su­

preme law. He resigned the important paper; and when his hopes were con­

founded by the nomination of Romanus, he could no longer regain his security,
re­

tract his declarations, nor oppose the second nuptials of the empress. Yet a
mur­

mur was heard in the palace; and the barbarian guards had raised their battle-
axes

in the cause of the house of Ducas, till the young princes were soothed by the
tears

of their mother, and the solemn assurances of the fidelity of their guardian,
who

filled the imperial station with dignity and honour. Hereafter I shall relate
his

valiant but unsuccessful efforts to resist 'the progress of the Turks. His
defeat

and captivity inflicted a deadly wound on the Byzantine monarchy of the east;
and

after he was released from the chains of the sultan, he vainly sought his wife
and

his subjects. His wife had been thrust into a monastery, and the subjects of
Ro­

manus had embraced a rigid maxim of the civil law, that a prisoner in the
hands

of the enemy is deprived, as by the stroke of death, of all the public and
private:

