01? THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 117

revenge embraces the moment, and selects the victim: and the earth often swal­

lows the assassin, or the ravisher, in the consummation of their crimes.
Superstition

involves the present danger with invisible terrors; and if .the image of
cteath may

sometimes be subservient to the virtue or repentance of individuals, an
affrighted

people is more forcibly moved to expect the end of the world, or to deprecate
with

servile homage the wrath of an avenging Deity. *

III. Ethiopia and Egypt have been stigmatized in every age, as the original

source and seminary ot the plague.(l) In a damp, hot, stagnating air, this
Afri­

can fever is generated from the putrefaction of animal substances, and
especially

from the swarms of locusts, not less destructive to mankind in their death
than in

their lives. The fatal disease which depopulated the earth in the time of
Justi­

nian and his successors,(2) first appeared in the neighbourhood of Pelusium,
be­

tween the Serbonian bog and the eastern channel of the Nile. From thence,

tracing as it were a double path, it spread to the east, over Syria, Persia,
and the

Indies, and penetrated to the west, along the coast of Africa, and over the
conti­

nent of Europe. In the spring of the second year, Constantinople, during three

or four months, was visited by the pestilence; and Procopius, who observed its

progress and symptoms with the eyes of a physician,(3) has emulated the skill

and diligence of Thucydides in the description of the plague of Athens. (4)
The

infection was sometimes announced by the visions of a distempered fancy, and

the victim despaired as soon as he had heard the menace and felt the stroke of
an

invisible spectre. But the greater number, in their beds, in the streets, in
their

usual occupation, were surprised by a slight fever; so slight, indeed, that
neither

the pulse nor the colour of the patient gave any signs of the approaching
danger.

The same, the next, or the succeeding day, it was declared by the swelling of
the

glands; particularly those of the groin, of the arm-pits, and under the ear;
and

when those buboes or tumours were opened, they were found to contain a coal,

or black substance, of the size of a lentil. If they came to a just swelling
and sup­

puration, the patient was saved by this kind and natural discharge of the
morbid

humour. But if they continued hard and dry, a mortification quickly ensued,
and

the fifth day was commonly the term of his life. The fever was often accompa­

nied with lethargy or delirium; the bodies of the sick were covered with black

pustules or carbuncles, the symptoms of immediate death; and in the constitu­

tions too feeble to produce an eruption, the vomiting of blood was followed by
a

mortification of the bowels. To pregnant women the plague was generally mor­

tal; yet one infant was drawn alive from his dead mother, and three mothers

survived the loss of their infected foetus. Youth was the most perilous
season;

and the female sex was less susceptible than the male; but every rank and pro­

fession was attacked with indiscriminate rage, and many of those who escaped

were deprived of the use of their speech, without being secure from a return
of

the disorder.(5) The physicians of Constantinople were zealous and skilful:
but

their art was baffled by the various symptoms and pertinacious vehemence of
the

disease: the same remedies were productive of contrary effects, and the event
ca­

priciously disappointed their prognostics of death or recovery. The ortVr of
fu­

nerals, and the right of sepulchres, were confounded: those who were left
without

friends or servants, lay unburied in the streets, or in their desolate houses;
and a

magistrate was authorized to collect the promiscuous heaps of dead bodies to
trans­

port them by land or water, and to inter them in deep pits beyond the
precincts

of the city. Their own danger, and the prospects of public distress, awakened

some remorse in the minds of the most vicious of mankind; the confidence of

(1) I have read with pleasure Mead's short, but elegant treatise concerning
pestilential disorders, the eighth

edition. London, 1722.

(2) The great plague which raged in 542, and the following years, (Pagi.
Critica, torn. ii. p. SIS.) must he

traced in Procopius, (Persic, lib. ii. c. 22,23.) Agathias {lib. v. p.
153,154.) Eragrius, (lib. iv. e. 29.) Paul Di»-

cnnus, (lib.il. c. 4. p. 776,777. (Gregory of Tours, (torn. ii. lib. 4.c. 5.
p. 205.) who styles it Lues Inguinaria, and

the Chronicles of Victor Tunnunensis, (p. 9. in Thesaur. Temporum,) of
Marcellinus, (p. 54.) and of Theo-

phanes (p. 153.)

(3) Dr. Friend (Hist. Medicin. in Opp. p. 416—450. Lond. 1733.) is satisfied
that Procopius must have studied

physic, from his knowledge and use of the technical words. Yet many words that
are now scientific, were

common and popular in tbe Greek idiom.

(4) See Thucydides,lib. ii.e. 47—54. p. 127—133. edit. Duker, and the poetical
description of the same

plague by Lucretius, (lib. ti. 1136—1284.) I was indebted to Ilr. Hunter for
an elaborate commentary on this

part of Thucydides, a quarto of six hundred pages. (Venet. 1603, apud Juntas,)
which was pronounced in

St. Mark's library, by Kabins Paullinus, Utinensis, a physician and
philosopher.

(5) Thucydides (c. 51.) affirms that the infection could only be once taken;
but Evagrius, who had family

experience of the plague, observes, that some persons, who had escaped the
first, sunk under the second attack;

and this repetition is confirmed by Fabiits Paullinus, (p. 588.) I observe
that on this head physicians are di­

vided: and the nature and operation of the disease may not always be similar.

