OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

prince of the Saracens, the ally and soldier of the emperor of Justinian.(1) A
pa­

rent who drags his son to the altar, exhibits the most painful and sublime
effort

of fanaticism: the deed, or the intention, was sanctified by the example of
saints

and heroes; and the father of Mahomet himself was devoted by a rash vow, and

hardly ransomed for the equivalent of a hundred camels. In the time of
ignorance,

the Arabs, like the Jews, and Egyptians, abstained from the taste of swine's

flesh;(2) they circumcised(3) their children at the age of puberty: the same
cus­

toms, without the censure or the precept of the Koran, have been silently
trans­

mitted to their posterity and proselytes. It has been sagaciously conjectured,
that

the artful legislator indulged the stubborn prejudices of his countrymen. It
is

more simple to believe that he adhered to the habits and opinions of his
youth,

without foreseeing that a practice congenial to the climate of Mecca, might
be­

come useless or inconvenient on the banks of the Danube or the Volga.

Arabia was free: the adjacent kingdoms were shaken by the storms of conquest

and tyranny, and the persecuted sects fled to the happy land where they might

profess what they thought, and practise what they professed. The religions of
the

Sabians and Magians, of the Jews, and Christians, were disseminated from the

Persian gulf to the Red Sea. In a remote period of antiquity, Sabianism was
dif­

fused over Asia by the science of the Chaldeans(4) and the arms of the
Assyrians,

From the observations of two thousand years, the priests and astronomers of
Ba-

bylon(5) deduced the eternal laws of nature and Providence, They adored the

seven gods or angels who directed the course of the seven planets, and shed
their

irresistible influence on the earth. The attributes of the seven planets, with
the

twelve signs of the zodiac, and the twenty-four constellations of the northern
and

southern hemisphere, were represented by images and talismans; the seven days

of the week were dedicated to their respective deities: the Sabians prayed
thrice

each day; and the temple of the moon at Haran was the term of their
pilgrimage. (6)

But the flexible genius of their faith was always ready either to teach or to
learn;

in the tradition of the creation, the deluge, and the patriarchs, they held a
singular

agreement with their Jewish captives; they appealed to the secret books of
Adam,

Seth, and Enoch: and a slight infusion of the gospel has transformed the last
rem­

nant of the polytheists into the Christians of St. John, in the territory of
Bassora. (7)

The altars of Babylon were overturned by the Magians; but the injuries of the
Sa­

bians were revenged by the sword of Alexander; Persia groaned above five hun­

dred years under a foreign yoke; and the purest disciples of Zoroaster escaped
from

the contagion of idolatry, and breathed with their adversaries the freedom of
the

desert. (8) Seven hundred years before the death of Mahomet, the Jews were

settled in Arabia: and a far greater multitude was expelled from the holy land

in the wars of Titus and Hadrian. The industrious exiles aspired to liberty
and

power; they erected synagogues in the castles and cities in the wilderness,
and

their gentile converts were confounded with the children of Israel, whom they

resembled in the outward mark of circumcision. The Christian missionaries were

still more active and successful: the catholics asserted their universal
reign; the

(1) Procopius, (de Bell. Persico, lib. i. c. 28.)Evagrius, (lib. vi. c. 21.)
and Pocock,(Speeimen, p. 72. 86.) attest

(he human sacrifices of the Arabs in the sixth century. The danger anil escape
of Abdallah, is a tradition rather

than a fact. (Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 82—84.)

(2) Suillis carnibna abstinent, says Solinus, (Polyhistor, c. 33.) who copies
Pliny, lib. viii. c. 68.)in the strange

supposition, tbat hogs cannot live in Arabia. The Egyptians were actuated by a
natural and superstitious

horror for that unclean beast, (Marsham, Canon, p. 205.) The old Arabians
likewise practised, port coitvm, the

right of ablution, (Herodot. Lib. i. c. 8.) which is sanctified by the
Mahometan law,(Reland, p. 75, &c.,Chardin,

or rather the Mollnh of Shaw Abbas, torn. iv.p. 71, he)

(3) The Mahometan doctors are not fond of the subject: yet they hold
circumcision necessary to salvation,

and even pretend that Mahomet was miraculously born without a foreskin,
(Pocock, Specimen, p. 319,320.

Sale's Preliminary Discourse, p. 106. 107.)

(4; Diodorns Siculus, (torn. t. lib. ii. p. 142—145.) has cast on their
religion the curious but superficial glance

of a Greek. Their astronomy would be far more valuable: they had looked
through the telescope of reason,

since they could doubt whether the sun were in the number of the planets or of
the fixed stars.

(5) Simplicius,(\vho quotes Porphyry) de Casio, lib. K. com. 46. p. 123. lin.
18. apud Marsham, Canon. Chron.

p. 474. who doubts the fact, because it is adverse to his systems. The
earliest date of the Chaldean observations

is the year 2234 before Christ. After the conquest of Babylon by Alexander,
they were communicated, at the

request of Aristotle, to the astronomer Hipparchus. What a moment in the
annals of science!

(6) Pocock (Specimen, p. 138—146.) Hottinger (Hist. Oriental, p. 162—203.)
Hyde (de Iteligione Vet. Persa-

'um, p. 124. 128, &c.) d'Herbelot (Sabi, p. 725,726.) and Sale (Preliminary
Discourse, p. 14, 15.) rather excite

than gratify our curiosity; and the last of these writers confounds Sabianism
with the primitive religion of Ute

Arabs.

(7) D'Anville rl'Euphiates de le Tigre, p. 130—147.) will fix the position of
these ambiguous Christians: As-

semannus (Bibliot. Oriental, lorn. iv. p. 607—614.) may explain their tenets.
But it is ft slippery task to ascer­

tain the creed of an ignorant people, afraid and ashamed to disclose their si-
cret traditions.

(8) The magi were fixed in the province of Bahrein, (Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet,
turn. iii. p. 114.) are mingled

will) the old Arabians, (Pocock, Specimen,p. 146—150.)

Voi. III. 40

