THE DECLINE AND FALL

again saved, and Astolphus was taught the lessons of justice and sincerity by
tfee

scourge of a foreign master. After this double chastisement, the Lombards lan­

guished about twenty years in a state of langour and decay. But their minds
were

not yet humbled to their condition; and instead of affecting the pacific
virtues of

the feeble, they peevishly harassed the Romans with a repetition of claims,
eva­

sions, and inroads, which they undertook without reflection, and terminated
with­

out glory. On either side their expiring monarchy was pressed by the zeal and

prudence of pope Adrian I. the genius, the fortune, and greatness of
Charlemagne,

the son of Pepin; these heroes of the church and state, were united in public
and

domestic friendship, and while they trampled on the prostrate, they varnished

their proceedings with the fairest colours of equity and moderation. (1) The
passes

of the Alps, and the walls of Pavia, were the only defence of the Lombards;
the

former were surprised, the latter were invested, by the son of Pepin; and
after a

blockade of two years, Desiderius, the last of their native princes,
surrendered

his sceptre and his capital. Under the dominion of a foreign king, but in the
pos­

session of their national laws, the Lombards became the brethren rather than
the

subjects of the Franks; who derived their blood, and manners, and language,
from

the same Germanic origin. (2)

The mutual obligations of the popes and the Carlovingian family form the im­

portant link of ancient and modem, of civil and ecclesiastical history. In the
con­

quest of Italy, the champions of the Roman church obtained a favourable
occasion, a

specious title, the wishes of the people, the prayers and intrigues of the
clergy.

But the most essential gifts of the popes to the Carlovingian race were the
digni­

ties of the king of France,(3) and of patrician of Rome. I. Under the
sacerdotal

monarchy of St. Peter, the nations began to resume the practice of seeking, on
the

banks of the Tiber, their kings, their laws, and the oracles of their fate.
The

Franks were perplexed between the name and substance of their government. All

the powers of royalty were exercised by Pepin, mayor of the palace; and
nothing,

except the regal title, was wanting to his ambition. His enemies were crushed
by

his valour; his friends were multiplied by his liberality; his father had been
the sa­

viour of Christendom; and the claims of personal merit were repeated and
ennobled

in a descent of four generations. The name and image of royalty were still
pre­

served in the last descendant of Clovis, the feeble Childeric; but his
obsolete rijjrit.

could only be used as an instrument of sedition: the nation was desirous of
restoring

the simplicity of the constitution; and Pepin, a subject and a prince, was
ambitious

to ascertain his own rank and the fortune of his family. The mayor and the no­

bles were bound, by an oath of fidelity, to the royal phantom: the blood of
Clovis

was pure and sacred in their eyes; and their common ambassadors addressed the

Roman pontiff, to dispel their scruples, or to absolve their promise. The
interest

of pope Zachary, the successors of the two Gregories, prompted him to decide,
and

to decide in their favour: he pronounced that the nation might lawfully unite,
in

the same person, the title and authority of king; and that the unfortunate
Childerie,

a victim of the public safety, should be degraded, shaved, and confined in a
mo­

nastery for the remainder of his days. An answer so agreeable to their wishes
was

accepted by \he Franks, as the opinion of a casuist, the sentence of a judge,
or the

oracle of a prophet: the Merovingian race disappeared from the earth; and
Pepin

was exalted on a buckler by the suffrage of a free people, accustomed to obey
his

laws and to march \jnder his standard. His coronation was twice performed,
with

the sanction of thepoj^s, by their most faithful servant St. Boniface, the
apostle of

Germany, and by the grateful hands of Stephen III., who, in the monastery of
St.

Denys, placed the diadem on the head of his benefactor. The royal unction of
the

kings of Israel was dexterously applied, (4) the successor of St. Peter
assumed the

(1) Except in the divorce of the daughto, of Desiderius, whom Charlemagne
repudiated sine aliqno cri-

mrae. Pope Stephen IV. hadmost furiously opposed the alliance of a noble
Frank-oum perfida, horrida.nec

dieendafaHcntissimanationeLangobardorum>towborn he imputes the first stain of
leprosy. (Cod. Carolm.

epist. 45. p. 178,179.) Another reason against t)» marriage was the existence
of a first wife. (Muratori, Anna-

fi d'ltalia, torn. ri. p. 232, 233.236, 237.) But ChMcmagne indulged himself
in the freedom of polygamy ur

concubinage. do r so-

(2)..SZ? ?he Annali d'ltalia of Muratori, torn. vi.aw the three first
dissertations of his Antiquitates Italia;

Medn Mn, torn. 1. ^

(3) Besides the common historians, three French critic, Launoy, (Opera, torn.
v. pars ii. lib. vii. epist. ix. p.

477-487.) Pagi, (Critic*, A. D. 751. no. 1.6. A. D. 752. no.t_io.) and Natalis
Alexander, (Hist. Novi Testa­

ment!, dissertat. n. p. 26—107.) have treated this subject of the deposition
of Childeric with learning ami at­

tention, but with a strong bias to save the independence of the crown. Vet
they are hard pressed by the text

which they produce of Eginhard, Theophanes, and the old annals, Laureshamensis
Fuldensis, Loisielani.

(4) Not absolutely tor the first time. On a less conspicuous theatre it had
been used, in the smh and se­

venth centunesjjjy the provincial bishops of Britain and Spain. The royal
unction of Constantinople wsa

