32 THE DECLINE AND FALL

the price appears to have varied from a mina to a talent; and Isocrates
himself,

who derides the avarice of th« sophists, required, in his school of rhetoric,
about

thirty pounds from each of his hundred pupils. The wages of industry are just

and honourable, yet the same Isocrates shed tears at the first receipt of a
stipend;

the Stoic might blush when he was hired to preach the contempt of money; and I

should be sorry to discover, that Aristotle or Plato so far degenerated from
the ex­

ample of Socrates, as to exchange knowledge for gold. But some property of
lands

and houses was settled by the permission of the laws, and the legacies of the
de­

ceased friends, on the philosophic chairs of Athens. Epicurus bequeathed to
his

disciples the gardens which he had purchased for eighty minx, or two hundred

and fifty pounds, with a fund sufficient for their frugal subsistence and
monthly fes­

tivals;^) and the patrimony of Plato afforded an annual rent, which, in eight
cen­

turies, was gradually increased from three to one thousand pieces of gold. (2)
The

schools of Athens were protected by the wisest and most virtuous of the Roman

princes. The library which Hadrian founded, was placed in a portico, adorned
with

pictures, statues, and a roof of alabaster, and supported by one hundred
columns of

Phrygian marble. The public salaries were assigned by the generous spirit of
the

Antonines; and each professor, of politics, of rhetoric, of the Platonic, the
Peripa­

tetic, the Stoic, and the Epicurean philosophy, received an annual stipend of
ten

thousand drachmx, or more than three hundred pounds sterling.(S) After the

death of Marcus, these liberal donations, and the privileges attached to the
thrones

of science, were abolished and revived, diminished and enlarged: but some ves­

tige of royal bounty may be found under the successors of Constantine; and
their

arbitrary choice of an unworthy candidate might tempt the philosophers of
Athens

to regret the days of independence and poverty. (4) It is remarkable, that the

impartial favour of the Antonines was bestowed on the four adverse sects of
philoso­

phy, which they considered as equally useful, or at least as equally innocent.
So­

crates had formerly been the glory and the reproach of his country; and the
first

lessons of Epicurus so strangely scandalized the pious ears of the Athenians,
that

by his exile, and that of his antagonists, they silenced all vain disputes
concerning

the nature of the gods. But, in the ensuing year, they recalled the hasty
decree,

restored the liberty of the schools, and were convinced, by the experience of
ages,

that the moral character of philosophers is not affected by the diversity of
their

theological speculations. (5)

The Gothic arms were less fatal to the schools of Athens than the
establishment

of a new religion, whose ministers superseded the exercise of reason, resolved
eve­

ry question by an article of faith, and condemned the infidel or sceptic to
eternal

flames. In many a volume of laborious controversy, they exposed the weakness

of the understanding and the corruption of the heart, insulted human nature in
the

sages of antiquity, and proscribed the spirit of philosophical inquiry, so
repugnant

to the doctrine, or at least to the temper, of an humble believer. The
surviving

sect of the Platonists, whom Plato would have blushed to acknowledge, extrava­

gantly mingled a sublime theory with the practice of superstition and magic;
and,

as they remained alone in the midst of a Christian world, they indulged a
secret

rancour against the government of the church and state; whose severity was
still

suspended over their heads. About a century after the reign of Julian, (6)
Pro­

elus,^) was permitted to teach in the philosophic chair of the academy; and
such

was his industry, that he frequently, in the same day, pronounced five
lessons, and

(1) See the testament of Epicurus in Diogen. laert. lib. x. segrn. 15—20. p.
611.512. A single epistle (ad Fa-

rmliares, 13.1.) displays the injustice of the Areopagus, the fidelity of the
Epicurmns, the dexterous politeness

of Cicero, and the mixture of contempt and esteem with which the Roman
senators considered the philosophy

and philosophers of Greece.

(2) Damascius, in Vit. Isidor. apud Photiura, Cod. 242.'p. 1054.

(3) See Lucian (in Eunech. torn. ii. p. 350—359. edit. Reitz;) Philostratus
(in Vit. Sophist, lib. ii. c. 2.,) and

Dion Cassius, or Xiphilin (lib. Ixxi. p. 1195.,) with their editors Du Soul,
Olearius. and Reimar, and, above alt,

Satmasius (Ad Hist. August, p. 72.) A judicious philosopher (Smith's Wealth of
iiations, vol. ii. p. 344— 374.,)

prefers the free contributions of the students to a fixed stipend for the
professor.

(4) Bracker, Hist. Crit. Philosoph. torn. ii. p: 310, &c

(5) The birth of Epicurus is fixed to the year 342 before Christ, (Bayle,)
Olympiad. 109.3. and he opened his

school at Athens, Olymp. 118. 3. three hundred and six years before the same
era. This intolerant law (Athe-

nsens, lib. xiii. p. 010. Diogen. Laertins, lib. v. s. 39. p. 290. Julius
Pollux, 9.5.) was enacted in the same, or

the succeeding year, (Sigonius. Opp. torn. v. p. 62. Menagius, ad Diogen.
Laert. p. 204. Corsini Fasti Attici,

torn. iv. p. 67,68.) Theophrastus, chief of the Peripatetics, and disciple of
Aristotle, was involved in the same

exile.

(0) This is no fanciful era; the pagans reckoned their calamities from the
reign of their hero. Proelus, whose

nativity is marked by his horoscope (A. D. 412. February 8, at C. P. died one
hundred and twenty-four years

«sro Iou\iavov (3aMriM»(, A. D. 485. (Marin, in Vita Prodi, c. 36.)

(7) The life of Proelus, by Marinus, was published by Fabricius (Hamburgh,
1700, et ad calcem Bibliot. La­

tin, Lond. 1703.) See Suidas (torn. iii. p. 185,186.,) Fabricius (Bibliot.
Grscc. lib. v. c. 26. p. 449—552.,) and

Brucker (Hist. Crit. Philosoph. torn, ii. p. 319—326.)

