OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

trade, and the sea-port of Adulis,(l) still decorated with the trophies of a
Gre­

cian conqueror. Along the African coast, they penetrated to the equator in

search of gold, emeralds, and aromatics, but they wisely declined an unequal

competition, in which they must be always prevented by the vicinity of the
Per­

sians to the markets of India; and the emperor submitted to the
disappointment,

till his wishes were gratified by an unexpected event. The gospel had been

preached to the Indians: a bishop already governed the Christians of St. Tho­

mas on the pepper-coast of Malabar; a church was planted in Ceylon, and the

missionaries pursued the footsteps of commerce to the extremities of Asia. (2)

Two Persian monks had long resided in China, perhaps in the royal city of Nan­

kin, the seat of a monarch addicted to foreign superstitions, and who actually
re­

ceived an embassy from the isle of Ceylon. Amidst their pious occupations,
they

viewed with a curious eye the common dress of the Chinese, the manufactures of

silk and the myriads of silk-worms, whose education (either on trees or in
houses)

had once been considered as the labour of queens.(3) They soon discovered that

it was impracticable to transport the short-lived insect, but that in the eggs
a nume­

rous progeny might be preserved and multiplied in a distant climate. Religion
or

interest had more power over the Persian monks than the love of their country:

after a long journey, they arrived at Constantinople imparted their project to
the

emperor, and were liberally encouraged by the gifts and promises of Justinian.

To the historians of that prince, a campaign at the foot of Mount Caucasus has

seemed more deserving of a minute relation, than the labours of these
missionaries

of commerce, who again entered China, deceived a jealous people by concealing

the eggs of the silk-worm in a hollow cane, and returned in triumph with the

spoils of the east. Under their direction, the eggs were hatched at the proper

season by the artificial heat of dung; the worms were fed with mulberry
leaves;

they lived and laboured in a foreign climate: a sufficient number of
butterflies

were saved to propagate the race, and trees were planted to supply the
nourish­

ment of the rising generations. Experience and reflection corrected the errors
of

a new attempt, and the Sogdoite ambassadors acknowledged in the succeeding

reign, that the Romans were not inferior to the natives of China in the
education

of the insects and the manufactures of silk, (4) in which both China and
Constan­

tinople have been surpassed by the industry of modern Europe. I am not insen-

ble of the benefits of elegant luxury; yet I reflect with some pain, that if
the im­

porters of silk had introduced the art of printing, already practised by the
Chi­

nese, the comedies of Menander, and the entire decads of Livy, would have been

perpetuated in the editions of the sixth century. A larger view of the globe

might at least have promoted the improvement of speculative science; but the
Chris­

tian geography was forcibly extracted from .texts of Scripture, and the study
of

nature was the surest symptom of an unbelieving mind. The orthodox faith con­

fined the habitable world to one temperate zone, and represented the earth

as an oblong surface, four hundred days'journey in length, two hundred in
breadth,

encompassed by the ocean, and covered by the solid crystal of the firma­

ment. (5)

IV. The subjects of Justinian were dissatisfied with the times, and with the
go­

vernment Europe was overran by the barbarians, and Asia by the monks; the

poverty of the west discouraged the trade and manufactures of the east; the
pro­

duce of labour was consumed by the unprofitable servants of the church, the
state,

and the army, and a rapid decrease was felt in the fixed and circulating
capitals

(1) See Procopius, Persic, (lib. ii. c. 20.) Cosmas affords some interesting
knowledge of the port and in­

scription of Adutis (Topograph. Christ, lib. ii. p. 138. 140—143.) and of the
traile of the Axumites along the

African coast of Barbaria or Zingi (p. 138,139.,) and as far as Taprobane
(lib. xi. p. 339.

(2) See the Christian missions in India, in Cosmas (lib. iii. p. 178,179. lib.
xi. p. 337.,) and consult Asseman.

Bibliot. Orient, (ton*., iv. p. 413—548.)

(3) The invention, manufacture, and general use of silk in China,may be seen
in Duhalde (Description Ge­

nerate de la Chine, torn. ii. p. 165. 205—223.) The province of Chekian is the
most renowned both for quanti­

ty and quality.

(4) Procopius, lib. viii. Gothic, iv. c. 17. Theophanes, Byznnt. apud Phot.
Cod. lxxxtv. p. 38. Zonaras,

torn. ii. lib. xiv. p. 69. Pagi (torn, ii. p. 602.) assigns to the year 552
this memorable importation. Menander

(in Excerpt. Legat. p. 107.) mentions the admiration of the Sogdoites : and
Theopbylact Simocatta (lib. vii. e.

9.) darkly represents the two rival kingdoms in {China,) the country of silk.

(5) Cosmas, surnamed Indicopleustes. or the Indian navigator, performed his
voyage about the year 522.and

composed,at Alexandria,between 535 and 547, Christian Topography, (Montfaucon,
Prrefat. c. 1.,) in which

he refutes the impious opinion, that the earth is a globe: and Pholitis had
read this work (Cod, xxxvi. p. 9. 10.,)

which displays the prejudices of a monk, with the knowledge of a merchant: the
most valuable psrt has been

given in French, and in Greek, by Melchisedec Thevenot (Relations Curieuses,
part 1..) and 'he whole is since

published in a splendid edition by the Pere Montfaucon (Nova Col lectio
Pairuni, Paris, 1707.2 vols, in fcl. torn,

li. p. 113—346.) But the editor, a theologian, might blush at not discovering
the Nestopan heresy of Cosmas,

which has beentdeteeted by La Croze (Cliristianssme des Indes, torn. i. p.
40—J6.)

Vol. in. 3

