OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE*

of the faithful, But in the long and hereditary exercise of power, they
assumed

the pride and attributes of royalty; the alternative of peace or war, of
reward or

punishment, depended solely on their will; and the revenues of the government

were reserved for local services or private magnificence. Instead of a regular

supply of men and money, the successors of the prophet were flattered with the

ostentatious gift of an elephant, or a cast of hawks, a suit of silk hangings,
or some

pounds of musk and amber. (1)

After the revolt of Spain, from the temporal and spiritual supremacy of the
Ab-

bassides, the first symptoms of disobedience broke forth in the province of
Africa.

Ibrahim, the son of Aglab, the lieutenant of the vigilant and rigid Harun, be­

queathed to the dynasty of the ylglabites the inheritance of his name and
power,

The indolence or policy of the caliphs dissembled the injury and loss, and
pursued

only with poison the founder of the lidrisites,{2) who erected the kingdom and

city of Fez on the shores of the western ocean. (3) In the east, the first
dynasty was

that of the Taheri£es;(4) the posterity of the valiant Taher, who, in the
civil wars

of the sons of Harun, had served with* too much zeal and success the cause of
Alma-

mon, the younger hrnther. He was sent into honourable exile, to command on the

banks of the Oxus; and the independence of his successors, who reigned in Cho-

rasan till the fourth generation, was palliated by their modest and respectful
de­

meanour, the happiness of their subjects, and the security of their frontier.
They

were supplanted by one of those adventurers so frequent in the annals of the
east,

who left his trade of a brazier (from whence the name of Sqffarides) for the
profes­

sion of a robber. In a nocturnal visit to the treasure of the prince of
Sistan, Jacob,

the son of Leith, stumbled over a lump of salt, which he unwarily tasted with
his

tongue. Salt, among the orientals, is the symbol of hospitality, and the pious
rob­

ber immediately retired without spoil or damage. The discovery of this honou­

rable behaviour recommended Jacob to pardon and trust; he led an army at first

for his benefactor, at last for himself, subdued Persia, and threatened the
residence

of the Abbassides. On his march towards Bagdad, the conqueror was arrested

by a fever. He gave audience in bed to the ambassador of the caliph; and be­

side him on a table were exposed a naked scimitar, a crust of brown bread and
a

bunch of onions. " If I die," said he, " your master is delivered from his
fears.

If I live, this must determine between us. If I am vanquished, I can return
with­

out reluctance to the homely fare of my youth." From the height where he
stood,

the descent would not have been so soft or harmless; a timely death secured
his

own repose and that of the caliph, who paid with the most lavish concessions
the

retreat of his brother Amrou to the palaces of Shiraz and Ispahan. The Abbas­

sides were too feeble to contend, too proud to forgive; they invited the
powerful

dynasty of the Samanidcs, who passed the Oxus with ten thousand horse, so
poor,

that their stirrups were of wood; so brave, that they vanquished the Soffarian
army,

eight times more numerous than their own. The captive Amrou was sent in

chains, a grateful offering to the court of Bagdad; and as the victor was
content

■with the inheritance of Transoxiana and Chorasan, the realms of Persia
returned

for awhile to the allegiance of the caliphs. The provinces of Syria and Egypt

■were twice dismembered by their Turkish slaves, of the race of Toulon and Ik-

shid. (5) These barbarians, in religion and manners, the countrymen of
Mahomet,

emerged from the bloody factions of the palace to a provincial command and an

independant throne: their names became famous and formidable in their time;
but

the founders of these two potent dynasties confessed, either in words or
actions,

the vanity of ambition. The first on his death-bed implored the mercy of God
to

(1) The dynasties of the Arabian empire may he studied in the Annals of
Elmacin, Abnlpharagius, and

Abulfeda, under ihe proper years; in the dictionary of d'Herbelot, under the
proper names. The tables of M,

de Gtiignes (Hist des Huns, torn. i. exhibit a general chronology of the east,
interspersed with some historical

anecdotes; but his attachment to national blood has sometimes confounded the
order of time and place.

(2) The Agiabitcs and Edrisites are the professed subject of M. de Cardonne.
(Hist, de PAfrique et de I'Es-

pagne sous la Domination des Arabes, torn. ii. p. 1—63.)

(3) To escape the reproach of error, 1 must criticise The inaccuracies of M.
de Guignes (torn. i. p. 329.) con­

cerning the Edrisites. l. The dynasty and city of Fez. could not Iw* founded
in the year of the Hegira 173,

since the founder was a potthwnom child of a descendant of All, who fled from
Mecca in the year 168. 2. This

founder, Edris, the son of Edris, instead of living to the improbable age of
one hundred and twenty years, A.

H. 313, died A. H. 214, in the prime of manhood. 3. The dynasty ended A. H.
307, twenty-three y<ars sooner

than it is fixed by the historian of the Huns. See the accurate Annals of
Abulfeda, p. 158,159. 185. 238.

(4) The dynasties of the Taherites and SotTurides, with the rise of that of
the Sanianides, are described in the

original history and Latin version of Mirchond; yet the most interesting facts
had already been drained by the

diligence of M. d'Herbelot.

(5) M. de Guigncs (Hist, des Huns, torn. iii. p. 124—154.) has exhausted the
Toulunides and IksMiIites of

Egrpt, and thrown some light on the Cannathiaus and Hamadanites.

Vol. Iir. 53

