OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

Since the emperor declined the fame and envy of original composition, we can

■only require at his hands', method, choice, and fidelity, the humble, though
indis­

pensable, virtues of a compiler. Among the various combinations of ideas, St
is

difficult to assign any reasonable preference; but as the order of Justinian
is differ­

ent in his three works, it is possible that all may be wrong; and it is
certain that

two cannot be right. In the selection of ancient laws, he seems to have viewed

his predecessors with jealousy, and with equal regard: the series could not
ascend

above the reign of Hadrian, and the narrow distinction- of paganism and
Christi­

anity, introduced by the superstition of Theodosius, had been abolished by the

consent of mankind. But the jurisprudence of the Pandects is circumscribed
with­

in a period of a hundred years, from the perpetual edict to the death of
Severus

Alexander: the civilians who lived under the first Cxsars, are seldom
permitted to

speak, and only three names can be attributed to the age of the republic. The

favourite of Justinian (it has been fiercely urged) was fearful of
encountering the

light of freedom and the gravity cf the Roman sages. Tribonian condemned to

oblivion the genuine and native wisdom of Cato, the Scssvolas, and Sulpicius;
while

he invoked spirits more congenial to his own, the Syrians, Greeks, and
Africans

who flocked to the imperial court to study Latin as a foreign tongue, and
jurispru­

dence as a lucrative profession. But the ministers of Justinian(l) were
instructed

to labour, not for the curiosity of antiquarians, but for the immediate
benefit of his

subjects. It was their duty to select the useful and practicable parts of the
Ro­

man law; and the writings of the old republicans, however curious or
excellent,

were no longer suited to the new system of manners, religion, and government.

Perhaps, if the preceptors and friends of Cicero were still alive, our candour
would

acknowledge, that, except in purity of language,(2) their intrinsic merit was
ex­

celled by the school of Papinian and.Ulpian. Thjp science of the laws is the
slow

growth of time and experience, and the advantage both of method and materials

is naturally assumed by the most recent authors. The civilians of the reign of
the

Antoniiies had studied the works of their predecessors: their philosophic
spirit had

mitigated-the rigour of antiquity, simplified the forms of proceeding, and
emerged

from the jealousy and prejudice of the rival sects. The choice of the
authorities

that compose the Pandects, depended on the judgment of Tribonian: but the
power

of his sovereign could not absolve him from the sacred obligations of truth
and fi­

delity. As the legislator of the empire, Justinian might repeal the acts of
the An-

tonines, or condemn, as seditious, the free principles, which were maintained
by

the last of the Roman lawyers. (3) But the existence of past facts is placed
be­

yond the reach of despotism; and the emperor was guilty of fraud and forgery,

when he corrupted the integrity of their text, inscribed with their venerable
names

the words and ideas of his servile reign,(4) and suppressed, by the hand of
power,

the pure and authentic copies of their sentiments. The changes and interpola­

tions of Tribonian and his colleagues are excused by the pretence of
uniformity :

but their cares have been insufficient, and the antinomies, or contradictions
of the

Code and Pandects, still exercise the patience and subtlety of modern
civilians.(5)

A rumour devoid of evidence has been propagated by the enemies of Justinian;

that the jurisprudence of ancient Rome was reduced to ashes by the author of
the

Pandects, from the vain persuasion, that it was now either false or
superfluous.

Without usurping an office so invidious, the emperor might safely commit to
igno­

rance and time the accomplishment of this destructive wish. Before the
invention

of printing and paper, the latibur and the materials of writing could be
purchased

only by the rich; and it may reasonably be computed, that the price of books
was

a hundred fold their present value. (6) Copies were slowly multiplied and cau-

(1) An ingenious and learned oration of Schulttngius (Jurisprudent -Ante-
Justinianea, p. 883—907.) justi­

fies the choice of Tribonian, against the passionate charges of Francis
Hottoman and his sectaries.

(2) Strip away the crust of Tribonian, and allow for the use of technical
words, and the Latin of the Pan-

dectj will be found not unworthy of the silver age. It has been vehemently
attacked by Laurentius Valla, ft

fastidious grammarian of the fifteenth century, and by his apologist Florid us
Sabinus. It has 'been defended

by Alciat and a nameless advocate (most probably James Capellus.) Their
various, treatises are collected by

Duker. (Opuscula de Latinitate veterura Jurisconsultoi-um, Lugd. Bat. 1721. in
12mn.)

(3) Nomina qniricrvi veteribus <ervavimus, legum au:em veritatem nostram
feeimus. Itaque siquid erat in

illis seditiosum, multa auttm talia crant ibi reposita, hoc decisum est et
definitum, et in perspicuutn finem de-

ducta est qusque lex (Cod. Justinian, lib. i. tit. Jtvii. leg. iii. No. 10.) A
frank confession I

(4) The number of these emblemata (a polite name for forgeries) is much
reduced by Bynkershoelc (in the

four last books of his observations.) who poorly maintains the right of
Justinian and the duty of Tribonian.

(5) The antimonies, or opposite laws of the Code and Pandects, are sometinres
the cause, and often the ex.

«use, of the glorious uncertainty of the civil law, which so often affords
what Mnntagne calls " Questions

pour i'Ami." See a fine passage of Franciseus Balduinus in Justinian (lib. ii.
p. 259, &c. apud Lodewig, p.

SOS, 3C6.)

(6) When Fust, or Faustui, sold at Paris his first printed bibles as
manuscripts, the price of a parchment

