THE DECLINE AND FALL

catalogue. Their capital, Cordova, with the adjacent towns of Malaga, Almeria,

and Murcia, had given birth to more than three hundred writers, and above se­

venty public libraries were opened in the cities of the Andalusian kingdom.
The

age of Arabian learning continued about five hundred years, till the great
irruption

of the Moguls, and was coeval with the darkest and most slothful period of Eu­

ropean annals; but since the sun of science has arisen in the west, it should
seem

that the oriental studies have languished and declined. (1)

In the libraries of the Arabians, as in those of Europe, the far greater part
ot

the innumerable volumes were possessed only of local value or imaginary merit.
(2)

The shelves were Crowded with orators and poets, whose style was adapted to

the taste and manners of their countrymen: with general and partial histories,

which each revolving generation supplied with a new harvest of persons and

events; with codes and commentaries of jurisprudence, which derived their au­

thority from the law of the prophet; with the interpreters of the Koran, and
or­

thodox tradition; and with the whole theological tribe, polemics, mystics,
scho­

lastics, and moralists, the first or the last of writers, according to the
different esti­

mate, of sceptics or believers. The works of speculation or science may be
reduced

to the four classes of philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, and physic. The
sages

of Greece were translated and illustrated in the Arabic language, and some
trea­

tises, now lost in the original, have been recovered in the versions of the
east, (3)

v/hich possessed and studied the writings of Aristotle and Plato, of Euclid
and

Apollonius, of Ptolemy, Hippocrates, and Galen. (4) Among the ideal systems,

which have varied with the fashion of the times, the Arabians adopted the
philo­

sophy of the Stagirite, alike intelligible or alike obscure for the readers of
every

age. Plato wrote for the Athenians, and his allegorical genius is too closely
blended

with the language and religion of Greece. After the fall of that religion, the
Pe­

ripatetics, emerging from their obscurity, prevailed in the controversies of
the

oriental sects; and their founder was long afterward restored by the
Mahometans

of Spain to the Latin schools. (5) The physics, both of the Academy and the
Ly-

exum, as they are built, not on observation, but on argument, have retarded
the

progress of real knowledge. The metaphysics of infinite, or finite spirit,
have too

often been enlisted in the service of superstition. But the human faculties
are for­

tified by the art and practice of dialectics; the ten predicaments of
Aristotle col­

lect and methodize our ideas,(6) and his syllogism is the keenest weapon of
dis­

pute. It was dexterously wielded in the schools of the Saracens, but as it is
more

effectual for the detection of error than for the investigation of truth, it
is not sur­

prising that new generations of masters and disciples should still revolve in
the

same circle of logical argument. The mathematics are distinguished by a pecu­

liar privilege, that, in the course of ages, they may always advance, and can
ne­

ver recede. But the ancient geometry, if I am not misinformed, was resumed in

the same state by the Italians of the fifteenth century; and whatever may be
the

origin of the name, the science of algebra is ascribed to the Grecian
Diophantus

by the modest testimony of the Arabs themselves. (7) They cultivated with more

success the sublime science of astronomy, which elevates the mind of man to
dis-

(1) These literary anecdotes are borrowed from the Bibliotheca Arabico-
Hispana, (Com. ii. p. 38.71.201,202.)

Leo Afrieanus, (de Arab. Medieis et Fhilosophis, in Fabric Bibliot. Grac.
torn. xiii. p. 259—298, partieolarly

274) and Henaudot, (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 274, 275. 53G, 537.) besides the
chronological remarks of Abulpba-

raapns.

(2) The Arabic catalogue of the Eseurial will girea just idea of the
proportion of the classes. In the library

of Cairo, the MSS. of astronomy and medicine amounted to six thousand five
handled.with two fair globes, the

oneofbrass.theolherofsilver. (Bibliot. Arab. Hisp. torn. i. p. 417.)

(3) As for instance, the fifth, sixth, and seventh books (the eighth is still
wanting) of the Conic Sections of

Apollomns Pergeeus, which were printed from the Florence MSS. 1661. (Fabric.
Biblior. Grsee. torn. ii.D.

559.) Yet the fifth book had been previously restored by the mathematical
divination of Viviana. (See Jtis

elope in Fontenclle, torn. v. p. 59. 8ie.)

(4) The merit of these Arabic versions is freely discussed by Renaudot.
(Fabric. Bibliot. Grace, torn. i. p.

812—816.) and piously defended by Gasira. (Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. i. p.
238—240.) Most of the ver­

sions nf Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates. Galen, Sec. are ascribed to Monain, a
physician ol'the Nestorian sect, who

flourished at Bagdad in the court of the caliphs, and died A. D. 876. He was
at the head of a sehool or manu­

factory of translations, and the works of his sons and disciples were
published under his name. See Abnlpha-

ragitis. (Dynast, p. 88. 115. 171—174. and Apuil Asseman, Bibliot. Orient,
torn. ii. p. 438.) d* Herbelot, (B'h

Hot. Orientate, p. 456.) Asseman, (Bibliot. Orient, torn. iii. p. 164.) and
Casiri, (Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. i. p.

238, Sec. 251. 286—290. 302. 304, Sec)

(5) See Mosheim, Iustitut. Hist. Eccles. p. 181. 214.236. 257. 315. 338.
396.438, &c.

(6) The most elegant commentary on the Categories or Predicaments of Aristotle
may be found in the Phite-

aophical Arrangements of Mr. .Tames Harris (London, 1775, in octavo,) who
laboured to revive the studies of

Grecian literature and philosophy.

(7) Abulpharagius, Dynast, p. 81. 222. Bibliot. Arab. Hist. torn. ii. p.
370,371. In quern (says the primate

of the Jacobites) ii immiaerit se lector, oceanum hoc in genere (al&braf)
invenict. The time of Diophantes <ti

Alexandria is unknown, but his six booksare still extant, and have been
illustrated bv the Greek Plasudcs and

the Frenchman Mtziriae. (Fabric, Bibliot. Grace, torn. tv. p. i2r-I5.)

