204 THE DECLINE AND PALL

source of life and immortality expired jpn mount Calvary. These alarming con»

sequences were affirmed with unblushing simplicity by Apollinaris,(l) bishop
of

Laodicea, and one of the luminaries of the church. The son of a learned gram­

marian, he was skilled in all the sciences of Greece; eloquence, erudition,
and

philosophy, conspicuous in the volumes of Apollinaris, were humbly devoted to

the service of religion. The worthy friend of Athanasius, the worthy
antagonist

of Julian, he bravely wrestled with the Arians and polytheists, and, though he
af­

fected the rigour of geometrical demonstration, his commentaries revealed the
li­

teral and allegorical sense of the Scriptures. A mystery, which had long
floated

in the looseness of popular belief, was defined by his perverse diligence in a
tech­

nical form; and he first proclaimed the memorable words,—" One incarnate na­

ture of Christ," which are still re-echoed with hostile clamours in the
churches

of Asia, Egypt and Ethiopia. He taught that the Godhead was united or mingled

with the body of a man; and that the Logos, the eternal Wisdom, supplied in

the flesh the place and office of a human soul. Yet as the profound doctor had

been terrified at his own rashness, Apollinaris was heard to mutter some faint
ac­

cents of excuse and explanation. He acquiesced in the old distinction of the

Greek philosophers, between the rational and sensitive soul of man; that he
might

reserve the Logos for intellectual functions, and employ the subordinate human

principle in the meaner actions of animal life. With the moderate Docetes, he

revered Mary as the spiritual rather than as the carnal, mother of Christ,
whose

body either came from heaven, impassable and incorruptible, or was absorbed,

and, as it were, transformed, into the essence of the Deity. The system of
Apol­

linaris was strenuously encountered by the Asiatics and Syrian divines, whose

schools are honoured by the names of Basil, Gregory, and Chrysostom, and
taint­

ed by those of Diodorus, Theodoric, and Nestorius. But the person of the aged

bishop of Laodicea, his character and dignity, remained inviolate, and his
rivals,

since we may not suspect them of the weakness of toleration, were astonished,

perhaps by the novelty of the argument, and diffident of the final sentence of
the

catholic church. Her judgment at length inclined in their favour; the heresy
of

Apollinaris was condemned, and the separate congregations of his disciples
were

proscribed by the imperial laws. But his principles were secretly entertained
in

the monasteries of Egypt, and his enemies felt the hatred of Theophilus and
Cy­

ril, the successive patriarchs of Alexandria.

V. The grovelling Ebionite, and the fantastic Docetes, were rejected and for­

gotten; the recent zeal against the errors of Apollinaris, reduced the
catholics to

a seeming agreement with the double nature of Cerinthus. But, instead of a
tem­

porary and occasional alliance they established, and we still embrace, the
substan­

tial, indissoluble, and everlasting union of a perfect God with a perfect man,
or

the second person of the trinity with a reasonable soul and human flesh. In
the

beginning of the fifth century, the unity of the two natures was the
prevailing

doctrine of the church. On all sides, it was confessed, that the mode of their
co­

existence could neither be represented by our ideas, nor expressed by our lan­

guage. Yet a secret and incurable discord was cherished between those who were

most apprehensive of confounding, and those who were most fearful of sepa­

rating, the divinity and the humanity of Christ. Impelled by religious frenzy,

they fled with adverse haste from the error which they mutually deemed most

destructive of truth and salvation. On either hand they were anxious to guard,

they were jealous to defend, the union and the distinction of the two natures,

and to invent such forms of speech, such symbols of doctrine, as were least

susceptible of doubt or ambiguity. The poverty of ideas and language tempted

them to ransack art and nature for every possible comparison, and each com­

parison misled their fancy in the explanation of an incomparable mystery. In

the polemic microscope, an atom is enlarged to a monster, and each party was
skil­

ful to exaggerate the absurd or impious conclusions that might be extorted
from

the principles of their adversaries. To escape from each other, they wandered

through many a dark and devious thicket, till they were astonished by the
horrid

phantoms of Cerinthus and Apollinaris, who guarded the opposite issues of the

theological labyrinth. As soon as they beheld the twilight ot sense and
heresy,

(1) t"or Apollinaris and his sect, see Socrates, lib. ii. c. 46. lib. iii. c.
16. Sozomen, lib. v. c. 18. lib. vi. c. 31—

27. Theoiforet, lib. v. 3.10,11. Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiquet, tonj.
Yij. p. 602—638. Not. p. 788—794.

in quarto, Venise, 1732. The cotemporary saints always mention the Bishop ot
Laodicea as a friend and bro­

ther. The style of the more recent historians is harsh and hostile; yet
Philostoreius compares him (lib. viii. c.

31-15.)to Basil and Gregory.

