36-t THE DECLINE AND FALL

had once inclined to the profession of Islam; but in the pilgrimage of Mecca,
ta~

balah was provoked to strike one of his brethren, and fled with amazement from

the stern and equal justice of the caliph. The victorious Saracens enjoyed at
Da­

mascus a month of pleasure and repose: the spoil was divided by the discretion
of

Abu Obeidah: an equal share was allotted to a soldier and to his horse; and a
double

portion was reserved for the noble coursers of the Arabian breed.

After the battle of Yermuk, the Roman army no longer appeared in the field;

and the Saracens might securely choose among the fortified towns of Syria, the
first

object of their attack. They consulted the caliph whether they should march to

Cxsarea or Jerusalem; and the advice of Ali determined the immediate siege of

the latter. To a profane eye, Jerusalem was the first or second capital of
Pales­

tine; but after Mecca and Medina, it was revered and visited by the devout
Mos­

lems, as the temple of the Holy Land, which had been sanctified by the revela­

tion of Moses, of Jesus, and of Mahomet himself. The son of Abu Sophian was

sent with five thousand Arabs to try the first experiment of surprise or
treaty ; but

on the eleventh day, the town was invested by the whole force of Abu Obeidah.

He addressed the customary summons to the chief commanders and people of

JElia,(l) " Health and happiness to every one that follows the right way! we
re-

?uire of you to testify, that there is but one God, and that Mahomet is his
apostle,

f you refuse this, consent to pay tribute, and be under us forthwith.
Otherwise

I shall bring men against you who love death better than you do the drinking
of

wine or eating hog's flesh. Nor will I ever stir from you, if it please God,
till I

have destroyed those that fight for you, and made slaves of your children."
But

the city was defended on every side by deep valleys and steep ascents; since
the

invasion of Syria, the walls and towers had been anxiously restored; the
bravest of

the fugitives of Yermuk had stopped in the nearest place of refuge; and in the
de­

fence of the sepulchre of Christ, the natives and strangers might feel some
sparks

of the enthusiasm which so fiercely glowed in the bosoms of the Saracens. The

siege of Jerusalem lasted four months; not a day was lost without some action
of

sally or assault; the military engines incessantly played from the ramparts;
and

the inclemency of the winter was still more painful and destructive to the
Arabs.

The Christians yielded at length to the perseverance of the besiegers. The pa­

triarch Sophromus appeared on the walls, and by the voice of an interpreter,
de­

manded a conference. After a vain attempt to dissuade the lieutenant of the
caliph

from his impious enterprise, he proposed, in the name of the people, a fair
capitu­

lation, with this extraordinary clause, that the articles of security should
be ratified

by the authority and presence of Omar himself. The question was debated in the

council of Medina; the sanctity of the place, and the advice of Ali, persuaded
the

caliph to gratify the wishes of his soldiers and enemies, and the simplicity
of his

journey is more illustrious than the royal pageants of vanity and oppression.
TTie

conqueror of Persia and Syria was mounted on a red camel, which carried,
besides

his person, a bag of corn, a bag of dates, a wooden dish, and a leather bottle
of

water. Wherever he halted, the company* without distinction, was invited to

partake of his homely fare, and the repast was consecrated bv the prayer and

exhortation of the commander of the faithful. (2) But in this expedition or
pil­

grimage, his power was exercised in the administration of justice; he reformed
the

licentious polygamy of the Arabs, relieved the tributaries from extortion and

icruelty, and chastised the luxury of the Saracens, by despoiling them of
their rich

silks, and dragging them on their faces in the dirt. When he came within sight

of Jerusalem, the caliph cried with a loud voice,—" God is victorious. O Lord,

give us an easy conquest!" and pitching his tent of coarse hair, calmly seated
him-

self on the ground. After signing the capitulation, he entered the city
without

fear or precaution; and courteously discoursed with the patriarch concerning
its

religious antiquities. (3) Sophronius bowed before his new master, and
secretly

some panegyrical strains of an Arabian port, to whom the chief or Gassan sent
from Constantinople a gift of

five hundred pieces of gold by the hands of the ambassadors of Omar.

(1) In the name of the city, the profane prevailed over the sacred; 'Jerusalem
was known to the devout Chris­

tians (Euseb. de Martyr. Palest, c. il.;) but the legal and popular
appellation of Mlin (the colony of .filim Ha-

ilnanus) has passed from the Romans to the Arabs (Rcland. Palestin. torn. i.
p. 207. torn. ii. p.835 D'Herbelot

Bibliotheqne Orientale, Cods, p. 269, Ilia, p. 420.) The epithet of At Cods,
the Holy, is used as the proper name

of Jerusalem. r

(a) The singular journey and equipage of Omar are described (besides Ockley,
vol. L p. 250.) 1st Murutdi

(Mcrveiltesdel'Kgvpte.p. 200—202.)

(3) The Arabs boast of an old prophecy preserved at Jerusalem, and describing
the name, the religion, and

Uie person ot Omar, the future conqueror. By such arts the Jews are said to
have soothed the pride of tack

firctgn masters, Cyrus and Alexander (Joseph. Am. Jud. lib, xi.Ci M. p. 347.
579-58!.)

