OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 815

vered! Anathema to the Nestorians! Let them depart from the synodf Let them

repair to RomeThe legates threatened; the emperor was absolute, and a

committee of eighteen bishops prepared a new decree, which was imposed on the

reluctant assembly. In the name of the fourth general council, the Christ in
one

person, but in two natures, was announced to the catholic world; an invisible
line

was drawn between the heresy of Apollinaris and the faith of St. Cyril; and
the

road to paradise, a bridge as sharp as a razor, was suspended over the abyss
by

the master-hand of the theological artist. During ten centuries of blindness
and

servitude, Europe received her religious opinions from the oracle of the
Vatican;

and the same doctrine, already varnished with the rust of antiquity, was
admitted

without dispute into the creed of the reformers, who disclaimed the supremacy
of

the Roman pontiff. The synod of Chalcedon still triumphs in the protestant

churches; but the ferment of controversy has subsided, and the most pious
Chris­

tians of the present day are ignorant or careless of their own belief
concerning the

mystery of the incarnation.

Far different was the temper of the Greeks and Egyptians under the orthodox

reigns of Leo and Marcian. Those pious emperors enforced with arms and edicts

the symbol of their faith ;(2) and it was declared by the conscience or honour
of

five hundred bishops, that the decrees of the synod of Chalcedon might be law­

fully supported, even with blood. The catholics observed with satisfaction,
that

the same synod was odious both to the Nestorians and the Monophysites;(3) but

the Nestorians were less angry, or less powerful, and the east was distracted
by

the obstinate and sanguinary zeal of the Monophysites. Jerusalem was occupied

by an army of monks; in the name of the one incarnate nature, they pillaged,

they burnt, they murdered; the sepulchre of Christ was defiled with blood; and

the gates of the city were guarded in tumultuous rebellion against the troops
of

the emperor. After the disgrace and exile of Dioscorus, the Egyptians still
re­

gretted their spiritual father; and detested the usurpation of his successor,

who was introduced by the fathers of Chalcedon. The throne of Proterius was

supported by a guard of two thousand soldiers; he waged a five years' war
against

the people of Alexandria; and on the first intelligence of the death of
Marcian,

he became the victim of their zeal. On the third day before the festival of
Easter,

the patriarch was besieged in the cathedral, and murdered in the baptistery.

The remains of his mangled corpse were delivered to the flames, and his ashes

to the wind: and the deed was inspired by the vision of a pretended angel: an

ambitious monk, who, under the name of Timothy the Cat,(4) succeeded to the

place and opinions of Dioscorus. This deadly superstition was inflamed, on
either

side, by the principle and the practice of retaliation: in the pursuit of a
meta­

physical quarrel, many thousands(5) were slain, and the Christians of every
de­

gree were deprived of the substantial enjoyments of social life, and of the
invi­

sible gifts of baptism and the holy communion. Perhaps an extravagant fable

of the times may conceal an allegorical picture of these fanatics, who
tortured

each other, and themselves. " Under the consulship of Venantius and Celer,"

says a grave bishop, '* the people of Alexandria, and all Egypt were seized
with a

strange and diabolical frenzy: great and small, slaves and freemen, monks and

clergy, the natives of the land, who opposed the synod of Chalcedon, lost
their

speech and reason, barked like dogs, and tore with their own teeth, the flesh
from

their hands and arms. "(6)

(1; Edoita-Nv * a xpgrurw ?, Krtpzfiftt$x .... 01 ttvrri.tyWTi; Qwpu
>-£vajvr*i, 01 ai/TiXiycuT,; thrruunftl

mrif, 01 BmAiyom,- eis Von*v »wbxSow<v. (Coocil. torn. iv. p. 1441.) Evagrius
and Liberatus present only the

placid faee of the synod, and discreetly slide orer these embers supposiios
cinere dotoso.

. (2) See in the Appendix to the Acts of Chalcedon, the confirmation of the
synod by Marcian (Concil. torn,

sv.p. 1781. 1783.,) his letters to the monks of Alexandria (p. 1791.,) of
Mount Sinai (p. 1793.,) of Jerusalem

and Palestine (p. 1798.,) his laws against the Entychians (p. 1809. 1811.
1831.,) the correspondence of Leo with

the provincial synods on the revolution of Alexandria fp. 1835. 1930.)

(3) Photius (or rather the Eulogius of Alexandria) confesses, in a fine
passage, the specious colour of this

double charge against Pope Leo and his synod of Chalcedon. fBibliot. Cod. 225.
p. 768.) He waged a double

war against the enemies of the church, and wounded either foe with the darts
of his adversary—xhtxkkkKoi;

BtKttri roue aurtTntKn; rrarparxj. Against Nestorius he seemed to introduce
the mxwi: of the Monophy­

sites: against Eutyches he appeared to countenance the asmsrim Slatpopa of the
Nestorians. The apologist

claims a charitable interpretation for the saints; if the same had been
extended to the heretics, the sound of

the controversy would have been lost in the air.

(4) AMsvasc, from bis nocturnal expeditions. In darkness and disguise he crept
round the cells of the monas­

tery, and whispered the revelation to his slumbering brethren (Theodor.
Lector, lib. i.)

(5) S>9voy; ti TOAjWjSswi /aupiov; suparw :rA.S)flii fti\vv$>lvxi ft* poiicr
tkv y*i xKKx loci stvrav TOV *.<;)*. Such is the hy­

perbolic language of the Henotocon.

torn'S p* 32F Cnronicle of victor Tunnensis, in the Lectiones Antitrua? of
Canulus, republished by Basnet,

