THE DECLINE AND FALL

tinople, the islands of Crete(l) and Sicily were subdued by the Arabs. The

former of these conquests is disdained by their own writers, who were ignorant
of

the fame of Jupiter and Minos; but it has not been overlooked by the Byzantine

historians, who now begin to cast a clearer light on the affairs of their own
times. (2)

A band of Andalusian volunteers, discontented with the climate or government
of

Spain, explored the adventures of the sea; but as they sailed in no more than
ten

or twenty galleys, their warfare must be branded with the name of piracy. As
the

subjects and secretaries of the "white party, they might lawfully invade the
domi­

nions of the black caliphs. A rebellious faction introduced them into
Alexandria;(S)

they cut in pieces both friends and foes, pillaged the churches and the
moschs,

sold above six thousand Christian captives, and maintained their station in
the

capital of Egypt, till they were oppressed by the forces and the presence of
Al-

mamon himself. From the mouth of the Nile to the Hellespont, the islands and

sea-coasts both of the Greeks and Moslems were exposed to their depredations;

they saw, they envied, they tasted, the fertility of Crete, and soon returned
with

forty galleys to a more serious attack. The Andalusians wandered over the land

fearless and unmolested; but when they descended with their plunder to the
sea­

shore, their vessels were in flames, and their chief, Abu Caab, confessed
himself

the author of the mischief. Their clamours -accused His madness or treachery:

"Of what do you complain?" replied the crafty emir. "I have brought you to a

land flowing with milk and honey. Here is your true country; repose from your

toils, and forget the barren place of your nativity.—And our wives and
children?

—Your beauteous captives will supply the place of your wives, and in their em­

braces you will soon become the fathers of a new progeny." The first
habitation

was their camp, with a ditch and rampart, in the bay of Suda; but an apostate

monk led them to a more desirable position in the eastern parts; and the name
of

Candax, their fortress and colony, has been extended to the whole island,
under

the corrupt and modern appellation of Candia. The hundred cities of the age of

Minos were diminished to thirty; and of these, only one, most probably
Cydonia, had

courage to retain the substance of freedom and the profession of Christianity.
The

Saracens of Crete soon repaired the loss of their navy; and the timbers of
mount

Ida were launched into the main. During a hostile period of one hundred and

thirty-eight years, the princes of Constantinople attacked these licentious
corsairs

with fruitless curses and ineffectual arms. •

The loss of Sicily(4) was occasioned by an act of superstitious rigour. An

amorous youth, who had stolen a nun from her cloister, was sentenced by the
em­

peror to the amputation of his tongue. Euphemius appealed to the reason and

policy of the Saracens of Africa; and soon returned with the imperial purple,
a

fleet of one hundred ships, and an army of seven hundred horse and ten
thousand

foot. They landed at Mazara near the ruins of the ancient Selinus; but after
some

partial victories, Syracuse(5) was delivered by the Greeks, the apostate was
slain

before her walls, and his African friends were reduced to the necessity of
feeding

on the flesh of their own horses. In their turn they were relieved by a
powerful

re-enforcement of their brethren of Andalusia: the largest and western part of
the

island was gradually reduced, and the commodious harbour of Palermo was chosen

for the seat of the naval and military power of the Saracens. Syracuse
preserved

about fifty years the faith which she had sworn to Christ and to Cssar. In the

last and fatal siege, her citizens displayed some remnant of the spirit which
haG

(1) The authors from whom I have learned the most of the ancient and modern
state of Crete, are Belon (Ob­

servations, See. e. iii.—xx. Paris, 1555.,) Tournefort (Voyage tin Levant,
torn. i. lettrea et 3.,) and Meursius

(Creta, in his works, torn. iii. p. 343—544.) Although Crete is styled by
Homer n*sby Dionysius Afco?* n

mmi iufcorc;, I cannot conceive that mountainous island to surpass, or even to
equal, io fertility, the greater part

of Spain.

(2) The most authentic and circumstantial intelligence is obtained from the
four books of the Continuation of

Theophanes, compiled by the pen or the command of Constantine Porphyrogenitus,
with the life of his fa<hcr

Basil the Macedonian (Scriptores poBt Theophanem, p. 1—162. a Francis.
Combesis, Paris, 1685.) The loss of

Crete and Sicily is related, lib. ii. p. 46—52. To these we may add the
secondary evidence of Joseph Geueiins

(lib. ii.fr. 21. Venet. 1733.,) George Cedrenus (Compend. p. 506—508..) and
John Scylitzes Curopalata (apnd

Karon. Anna). Eccles. A. D. 827. no. 24. Stc.) But the modern Greeks are such
notorious plagiaries, that X

should only emote a plurality of names.

(3) Benaudot (Hist. Patriarch. A"lex. p. 251—255. 268—270.) has described the
ravages of the Andalusian

Arabs in Egypt, but has forgot to connect them with the conquest of Crete.

(4) (says the continuator of Theophanes, lih; ii. p. 51.) Ss T«yr»
<r«[pso"T«Tc* *tn xXaTiwunpo* ^ toti

ypxqeuT* fcjfic^uwtrrw itej yjtfx; jxflowr* tipar. This history of the loss of
Sicily is no longer extant. Muratori

(Annal d'ltulia, torn. vii. p. 7. io. 21. &:c.) lias added some circumstances
from the Italian chronicles.

(5) The splendid and interesting Tragedy of Tancrede would adapt itself much
better to this epoch, titan fo

the date (A. D. 1005.) which Voltaire himself has chosen. But I must gently
reproach the poet, for bar&uTg

jivto the Greek subjects the spirit of modern knights and ancient republicans.

