THE DECLIKE AND BALL

The authority and station of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Christ, and Maho­

met, rise in just gradation above each other; but whosoever hates or rejects
any

one of the prophets is numbered with the infidels. The writings of the patri­

archs were extant only in the apocryphal copies of the Greeks and Syrians:(l)

the conduct of Adam had not entitled him to the gratitude or respect of his
chil­

dren: the seven precepts of Noah were observed by an inferior and imperfect

class of the proselytes of the synagogue(2) and the memory pf Abraham was ob­

scurely revered by the Sabians in his native land of Chaldea: of the myriads
of

prophets, Moses and Christ alone lived and reigned; and the remnant of the
inspired

writings was comprised in the books of the Old and the New Testament. The

miraculous story of Moses is consecrated and embellished in the Koran;(3) and
the

captive Jews enjoy the secret revenge of imposing their own belief on the
nations

whose recent creeds they deride. For the author of Christianity, the Mahome­

tans are taught by the prophet to entertain a high and mysterious reverence.
(4)

'* Verily, Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, is the apostle of God, and his word,

which he conveyed into Mary, and a Spirit proceeding from him: honourable in

this world, and in the world to come; and one of those who approach near to
the

presence of God. "(5) The wonders of the genuine and apocryphal gospels(6)

are profusely heaped on his head; and the Latin church has not disdained to
bor­

row from the Koran the immaculate conception(7) of his virgin mother. Yet

Jesus was a mere mortal; and, at the day of judgment, his testimony will serve
to

condemn both the Jews, who reject him as a prophet, and the Christians, who

adore him as the Son of God. The malice of his enemies aspersed his
reputation,

and conspired against his life; but their intention only was guilty, a phantom
or

a criminal was substituted on the cross, and the innocent saint was translated
to the

seventh heaven. (8) During six hundred years the gospel was the way of truth
and

salvation: but the Christians insensibly forgot both the laws and the example
of

their founder; and Mahomet was instructed by the Gnostics to accuse the
church,

as well as the synagogue, of corrupting the integrity of the sacred text. (9)
The

{liety of Moses and of Christ rejoiced in the assurance of a future prophet,
more il-

ustrious than themselves: the evangelic promise of the Paraclete, or Holy
Ghost,

was prefigured in the name, and accomplished in the person, of Mahomet,(10)
the

greatest and last of the apostles of God.

The communication of ideas requires a similitude of thought and language;

the discourse of a philosopher would vibrate without effect on the ear of a
pea­

sant; yet how minute is the distance of their understandings, if it be
compared

with the contact of an infinite and a finite mind, with the word of God
expressed

by the tongue or the pen of a mortal ? The inspiration of the Hebrew prophets,

of the apostles and evangelists of Christ, might not be incompatible with the
ex­

ercise of their reasonand memory; and the diversity of their genius is
strongly

(1) For the apocryphal hooks of Adam, tee Fabricius, Codex Pseudepigraphtis V.
T. p. 27—29; of Seth, p.

154—157; of Enoch, p. 160—219. But the book of Enoch is consecrated, in some
measure, by the quotation of

the apostle St. Jude; and a long legendary fragment is alleged by Syncellus
and Scaliger.

(2) The seven precepts of Noah are explained by Marsham, (Canon Chronicus, p.
154—180.) who adopts on

tins occasion, the learning and credulity of Selden.

(3) The articles of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, &c. in the Bibliotheque, of
d'Herbelot, are gaily bedecked

with the fanciful legends of the Mahometans, who have built on the groundwork
of Scripture and the Talmud.

(4) Koran, c. 7. p. 128, &c. c. 10. p. 173, &c. D'Herbelot. p. 647, &c.

(5) Koran, c. 3. p. 80. c. 4. p. 60. D'Herbelot, p. 399, &c.

(6) See the gospel of St. Thomas, or of the Infancy, in tbe Codex Apocryphus
N. T. of Fabricius. who col­

lects the various testimonies concerning it. (p. 128—158.) It was published in
Greek by Cotelier, and in Arabic

by Sike, who thinks our present copy more recent than Mahomet. Yet hit
quotations agree with the original

about the speech of Christ in his cradle, his living birds of clav, &c. (Sike,
c. I. p. 168, 169. c. 36. p. 198,199. c.

46. p. 206. Cotelier, c. 2. p. 160,161.)

(7) It is darkly hinted in the Koran, (c. 3. p. 39.) and more clearly
explained by the tradiiion of the Somnites.

(Sale's Note, and Maracci, torn. ii. p. 112.) In the twelfth century, the
immaculate conception was condemned

by St. Bernard as a presumptious novelty, (Fra. Papio, Xstoria del Concilio di
Trento, lib. ii.)

(8) See the Koran, c. 3. v. 53. and c. 4. v. 156. of Mnracci's edition. Deus
est prffistamissimus dolose agentinm

(an odd phrase) .... nee crucifixerunt cum, sed objecta est eis similitudo; an
expression that may suit with

the system of the Docetes; but the commentators believe (Maracci, torn. ii. p.
113—115.173. Sale, p. 42. 43. 79.)

that another man. a friend or an enemy, was crucified in the likeness of
Jesus; a fable which thev had read, in

the gospel of St. Barnabas, and w Inch had been started as early as the time
nfiren»us, by some Ebionite here­

tics. (Beausobre, Hist, du Manicheisme, torn. ii. p. 25. Mosheim, de Reb.
Christ, p. 353.)

(9) This charge is obscurely urged in the Koran: (C. 3. p. 45.) but neither
Mahomet, nor his followers, are

sufficiently versed in languages and criticism to give any weight or colour to
their suspicious. Yet tbe Arians

«nd Nestorians could relate some stories, and the illiterate prophet might
listen to the bold assertions of the

Manichaeans. See Beansobre, lom. i. p. 291—305.

(10) Among the prophecies of the Old and New Testament, which are perverted by
the fraud or ignorance of

the Mussulmans, they apply to the prophet the promise of the Paracle)e,or
Comforter, which had been already

usurped by the Montanists and Mauiehmans; (Beausobre, Hist. Critique du
Manicheisme, torn. i. p. 263, &c.)

and the easy change of letters, sripixxvrc; for sraaaxMjw,-, affords the
ervraologv of the name of Mohammed.

{Maracci, torn. i. part i. p. 15—28.)

