OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 12S

Sawyers, to preserve the constitutions of the pagan emperors from Hadrian to

Constantine. The third, which is still extant, was digested in sixteen books
by

the order of the young Theodosius, to consecrate the laws of the Christian
princes

from Constantine to his own reign. But the three codes obtained an equal
autho­

rity in the tribunals; and any act which was not included in the sacred
dcposite,

might be disregarded by the judge as spurious or obsolete. (1)

Among savage nations, the want of letters is imperfectly supplied by use of
visi­

ble signs, which awaken attention, and perpetuate the remembrance of any pub­

lic or private transaction. The jurisprudence of the first Romans exhibited
the

scenes of a pantomime; the words were adapted to the gestures, and the
slightest

error or neglect in the forms of proceeding was sufficient to annul the
substance of

the fairest claim. The communion of the marriage-life was denoted by the ne­

cessary elements of. fire and water:(2) and the divorced wife resigned the
bunch

of keys, by the delivery of which she had been invested with the government of

the family. The manumission of a son, or a slave, was performed by turning

him round with a gentle blow on the cheek: a work was prohibited by the
casting

of a stone; prescription was interrupted by the breaking of a branch; the
clenched

fist was the symbol of a pledge or deposite; the right hand was the gift of
faith and

confidence. The indenture of covenants was a broken straw; weights and scales

were introduced into every payment, and the heir who accepted a testament, was

sometimes obliged to snap his fingers, to cast away his garments, and to leap
and

dance with real or affected transport. (3) If a citizen pursued any stolen
goods

into a neighbour's house, he concealed his nakedness with a linen towel, and
hid

his face with a mask or basin, lest he should encounter the eyes of a virgin
or a

matron. (4) In a civil action, the plaintiff touched the ear of his witness,
seized

his reluctant adversary by the neck; and implored, in solemn lamentation, the
aid

of his fellow-citizens. The two competitors grasped each other's hand as if
they

stood prepared for combat before the tribunal of the pretor: he commanded them

to produce the'object of the dispute; they went, they returned, with measured

steps, and a clod of earth was cast at his feet to represent the field for
which they

contended. This occult science of the words and actions of law was the inheri­

tance of the pontiffs and the patricians. Like the Chaldean astrologers, they
an­

nounced to their clients the days of business and repose; these important
trifles

were interwoven with the religion of Numa; and, after the publication of the

twelve tables, the Roman people were still enslaved by the ignorance of
judicial

proceedings. The treachery of some plebeian officers at length revealed the
pro­

fitable mystery: in a more enlightened age, the legal actions were derided and
ob­

served; and the same antiquity which sanctified the practice, obliterated the
use

and meaning, of this primitive language. (5)

A more liberal art was cultivated, however, by the sages of Rome, who, in a

stricter sense, may be considered as the authors of the civil law. The
alteration

of the idiom and manners of the Romans, rendered the style of the twelve
tables

less familiar to each rising generation, and the doubtful passages were
imperfectly

explained by the study of legal antiquarians. To define the ambiguities, to
cir­

cumscribe the latitude, to apply the principles, to extend the consequences,
to

reconcile the real or apparent contradictions, was a much nobler and more im­

portant task; and the province of legislation was silently invaded by the
expoun­

ders of ancient statutes. Their subtle interpretations concurred with the
equity

of the pretor, to reform the tyranny of the darker ages: however strange or
in­

tricate the means, it was the aim of artificial jurisprudence to restore the
simple

dictates of nature and reason, and the skill of private citizens was usefully
em­

ployed to undermine the public institutions of their country. The revolution
of

(1) Schulting, Jurisprudentia Antc-Tostinianea, p. fiBl—71B. Cnjacins
assignee! to Gregory the reigns from

Hadrian to Oallienus, and the continuation to his fellow-labourer Hermogenes.
This general division may be

just; hut they often trespassed on each othe.-'s ground.

(2) Sean-ola, most probab'.y Cervidius Sesevola the master of Papinian,
consider? this acceptance of fire

and water as the essence of marriage (Pandect, lib. xxiv. tit. i. leg. txvi.
See Heineccius, Hist. J. n. No. 317.)

_ (3) Cicero (de Ofliciis, 3. 19.) may state an ideal case, but St. Ambrose
(de Officiis. 3. 2.) appeals to the prac­

tice of his own times, which he understood as a lawyer and a magi>tratc.
(Schulting ad Ulpian. Fragment,

lit. xlii. No. 28. p. 043,644\) I

(4) The fartum lance licioquc conceplura was no longer understood in the time
of the Antonines (Aulas

G11 litis, 16. lo.) The Attic derivation of Heineccius (Antiquitat. Rom. lib.
iv. tit. i. No. 13—21.) is supported

by the evidence of Aristophasjes, his scholiast and Pollux.

(5) In his oration for Murena (c. 0—13.,) Cicero turns into ridicule the forms
and mysteries of the civilians,

which are represented with more candour by Aulus Gellius (Noct. Attic. 20.10.)
Gravioa (Opp. p. 265— 367..''

and Heineccius (Antiquitat. lib. iv. tit. vi.)

