OF THE KOMAN EMPIRE. 93

thousand insurgents, assembling in the field of Bulla, elected Stoza for their
chief,,

a private soldier, who possessed, in a superior degree, the virtues of a
rebel. Un­

der the mask of freedom, his eloquence could lead, or at least impel, the
passions

of his equals. He raised himself to a level with Belisarius, and the nephew of
the

emperor, by daring to encounter them in the field; and the victorious generals

were compelled to acknowledge, that Stoza deserved a purer cause, and a more

legitimate command. Vanquished in battle, he'dexterously employed the arts of

negotiation s*a Roman army was seduced from their allegiance, and the chiefs,

•who had trusted to his faithless promise, were murdered by his order, in a
church

of Numidia. When every resource, either of force or perfidy, was exhausted,

Stoza, with some desperate Vandals, retired to the wilds of Mauritania,
obtained

the daughter of a barbarian prince, and eluded the pursuit of his enemies, by
the

report of his death. The personal weight of Belisarius, the rank, the spirit,
and

the temper, of Germanus, the emperor's nephew, and the vigour and success of
the

second administration of the eunuch Solomon, restored the modesty of the camp,

and maintained for awhile, the tranquillity of Africa. But the vices of the
By­

zantine court, were felt in that distant province; the troops complained that
they

■were neither paid nor relieved; and as soon as the public disorders were
sufficiently

mature, Stoza was again alive, in arms, and at the gates of Carthage. He fell
in

a single combat, but he smiled in the agonies of death, when he was informed
that

his own javelin had reached the heart of his antagonist. The example of Stoza,

and the assurance that a fortunate soldier had been the first king, encouraged
the

ambition of Gontharis, and he promised by a private treaty, to divide Africa
with

the Moors, if, with their dangerous aid, he should ascend the throne of
Carthage.

The feeble Areobindus, unskilled in the affairs of peace and war, was raised
by

his marriage with the niece of Justinian to the office of exarch. He was
suddenly

oppressed by a sedition of the guards, and his abject supplications, which
pro­

voked the contempt, could not move the pity, of the inexorable tyrant. After a

reign of thirty days, Gontharis himself was stabbed at a banquet, by the hand
or

Artaban; and it is singular enough, that an Armenian prince, of the royal
family

of Arsaces, should re-establish at Carthage the authority of the Roman empire.

In the conspiracy which unsheathed the dagger of Brutus against the life of
C:esar,

every circumstance is curious and important to the eyes of posterity: but the
guilt

or merit of these loyal or rebellious assassins could interest only the
cotemporaries

of Procopius, who, by their hopes and fears, their friendship, or resentment,
were

personally engaged jp the revolutions of Africa.(l)

That country was rapidly sinking into the state of barbarism, from whence it
had

been raised by the Phoenician colonies and Roman laws, and every step of
intestine-

discord was marked by some deplorable victory of savage man over civilized so­

ciety. The Moors,(2) though ignorant of justice, were impatient of oppression:

their vagrant life and boundless wilderness disappointed the arms, and eluded
the

chains of a conqueror; and experience had shown, that neither oaths nor
obliga­

tions could secure the fidelity of their attachment. The victory of mount
Auras

had awed them into momentary submission; but if they respected the character

of Solomon, they hated and despised the pride and luxury of his two nephews,

Cyrus and Sergius, on whom their uncle had imprudently bestowed the provincial

governments of Tripoli and Pentapolis. A Moorish tribe encamped under the

walls of Leptis, to renew their alliance, and receive from the governor the
custo­

mary gifts. Fourscore of their deputies were introduced as friends into the
city;

but, on the dark suspicion of a conspiracy, they were massacred at the table
of

Sergius; and the clamour of arms and revenge was re-echoed through the valleys

of mount Atlas, from both the Syrtes to the Atlantic ocean. A personal injury,

the unjust execution, or murder of his brother, rendered Antalus the enemy of

the Romans. The defeat of the Vandals had formerly signalized his valour; the

rudiments of justice and prudence were still more conspicuous in a Moor; and

while he laid Adrumetum in ashes, he calmly admonished the emperor that the

peace of Africa might be secured by the recall of Solomon and his unworthy ne­

phews. The exarch led forth his troops from Carthage: but at the distance of

(1) Yet I must not refute him the merit of painting, in lively colour), the
murder of Gontharis. One of

the assassins uttered a sentiment not unworthy of a Roman patriot.—" If I
fiiil (said Artasiresj in the fine

stroke, kill me on the spot, lest the rack should extort a discovery of my
accomplices."

(2) The Moorish wars are occasionally introduced into the narrative of
Procopius: (Vandal, lib. ii. c. 19—23.

2J. S7,28. Gothic, lib. iv. c. 17.) and Theophanes adds some prosperous and
adverse events in the last years of

Justinian.

