OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 269

liand, that Could reach the public enemy, inflicted on his body some mark of
in­

genious or brutal cruelty, till two friendly Italians, plunging their swords
into his

body, released him from all human punishment. In this long and painful agony

—"Lord, have mercy on me!" and " why willyou bruise a broken reed.'" were

the only words that escaped from his mouth. Our hatred for the tyrant is lost
in

pity for the man; nor can we blame his pusillanimous resignation, since a
Greek

Christian was no longer master of his life.

I have been tempted to expatiate on the extraordinary character and adventures

of Andronicus; but I shall here terminate the series of the Greek emperors
since

the time of Heraclius. The branches that sprang from the Comnenian trunk had

insensibly withered; and the male line was continued only in the posterity of
An­

dronicus himself, who, in the public confusion, usurped the sovereignty of
Trebi-

zond, so obscure in history, and so famous in romance. A private citizen of
Phi­

ladelphia, Constantine Angelus, had emerged to wealth and honours by his mar­

riage with a daughter of the emperor Alexius. His son Andronicus is
conspicuous

only by his cowardice. His grandson Isaac punished and succeeded the tyrant;

but he was dethroned by his own vices and the ambition of his brother; and the

discord introduced the Latins to the conquest of Constantinople, the first
great pe­

riod in the fall of the eastern empire.

If we compute the number and duration of the reigns; it will be found, that a

period of six hundred years is filled by sixty emperors, including in the
Augustan

list some female sovereigns; and deducting some usurpers who were never ac­

knowledged in the capital, and some princes who did not live to possess their
in­

heritance. The average proportion will allow ten years for each emperor, far
be­

low the chronological rule of Sir Isaac Newton, who, from the experience of
more

recent and regular monarchies, has defined about eighteen or twenty years as
the

ter,m of an ordinary reign. The Byzantine empire was most tranquil and pros­

perous when it could acquiesce in hereditary succession; five dynasties, the
Hera-

clian, Isaurian, Amorian, Basilian, and Comnenian families, enjoyed and trans­

mitted the royal patrimony during their respective series of five, four,
three, six,

and four generations; several princes number the years of their reign with
those of

their infancy: and Constantine VII. and his two grandsons occupy the space of
an

entire century. But in the intervals of the Byzantine dynasties, the
succession is

rapid and broken, and the name of a successful candidate is speedily erased by
a

more fortunate competitor. Many were the paths that led to the summit of roy­

alty; the fabric of rebellion was overthrown by the stroke of conspiracy, or
un­

dermined by the silent arts of intrigue; the favourite of the soldiers or
people, of

the senate or clergy, of the women and eunuchs, were alternately clothed with

the purple; the means of their elevation were base, and their end was often
con­

temptible or tragic. A being of the nature of man, endowed with the same fa­

culties, with a longer measure of existence, would cast down a smile of pity
and

contempt on the crimes and follies of human ambition, so eager, in a narrow
span,

to grasp at a precarious and short-lived enjoyment. It is thus that the
experience

of history exalts and enlarges the horizon of our intellectual view. In a
compo­

sition of some days, in a perusal of some hours, six hundred years have rolled

away, and the duration of a life or reign is contracted to a fleeting moment:
the

grave is ever beside the throne; the success of a criminal is almost instantly
fol­

lowed by the loss of his prize; and our immortal reason survives and disdains
the

sixty phantoms of kings who have passed before our eyes, and faintly dwell on

our remembrance. The observation, that in every age and climate, ambition has

prevailed with the same commanding energy, may abate the surprise of a philo­

sopher; but while he condemned the vanity, he may search the motive, of this
uni­

versal desire to obtain and hold the sceptre of dominion. To the greater part
of

the Byzantine series, we cannot reasonably ascribe the love of fame and
mankind.

The virtue alone of John Comnenus was beneficent and pure: the most illustri­

ous of the princes, who precede or follow that respectable name, have trod
with

some dexterity and vigour, the crooked and bloody paths of a selfish policy;
in

scrutinizing the imperfect characters of Leo the Isaurian, Basil I., and
Alexius

Comnenus, of Theophilus, the second Basil, and Manuel Comnenus, our esteem

and censure are almost equally balanced; and the remainder of the imperial
crowd

could only desire and expect to be forgotten by posterity. Was personal happi­

ness the aim and object of their ambition ? I shall not descant on the vulgar
topic

of the misery of kings; but I may surely observe, that their condition, of all
others,

k the most pregnant with fear, and the least susceptible of hope. For these
op­

