THE DECLINE AND FALL

ries;(l) but, although he laid them at the foot of the throne, the pride of
Justinian

must have been wounded by the praise of a hero, who perpetually eclipses the
glory

of his inactive sovereign. The conscious dignity of independence was subdued
by

the hopes and fears of a slave; and the secretary of Belisarius laboured for
pardon

and reward in the six books of the imperial edifices. He had dexterously
chosen

a subject of apparent splendour, in which he could loudly celebrate the
genius, the

magnificence, and the piety of a prince, who, both as a conqueror and
legislator,

had surpassed the puerile virtues of Themistocles and Cyrus. (2)
Disappointment

might urge the flatterer to secret revenge; and the first glance of favour
might

again tempt him to suspend and suppress a libel;(3) in which the Roman Cyrus
is

degraded into an odious and contemptible tyrant, in which both the emperor

and his consort Theodora are seriously represented as two demons, who had as­

sumed a human form for the destruction of mankind. (4) Such base inconsistency

must doubtless sully the reputation, and detract from the credit, of
Procopius: yet,

after the venom of his malignity hj^s been suffered to exhale, the residue of
the

anecdotes, even the most disgraceful facts, some of which had been tenderly
hint­

ed in his public history, are established by their internal evidence, or the
authen­

tic monuments of thetimes.(5) From these various materials, I shall now pro­

ceed to describe the reign of Justinian, which will deserve and occupy an
ample

space. The present chapter will explain the elevation and character of Theodo­

ra, the factions of the circus, and the peaceful administration of the
sovereign of

the east. In the three succeeding chapters, I shall relate the wars of
Justinian

which achieved the conquest of Africa and Italy; and I shall follow the
victories

of Belisarius and Narses, without disguising the vanity of their triumphs, or
the

hostile virtue of the Persian and Gothic heroes. The series of this volume
will

embrace the jurisprudence and theology of the emperor; the controversies and

sects which still divide the oriental church; the reformation of the Roman
law,

which is obeyed or respected by the nations of modern Europe.

I. In the exercise of supreme power, the first act of Justinian was to divide
it

with the woman whom he loved, the famous Theodora,(6) whose strange eleva­

tion cannot be applauded as the triumph of female virtue. Under the reign of

Anastasius, the care of the wild beasts maintained by the green faction of
Con­

stantinople, was intrusted to Acacius, a native of the isle of Cypress, who,
from

his employment, was surnamed the master of the bears. This honourable office

was given after his death to another candidate, notwithstanding the diligence
of

his widow, who had already provided a husband and a successor. Acacius had

left three daughters, Comito,(7) Theodora, and Anastasia, the eldest of whom

did not then exceed the age of seven years. On a solemn festival, these
helpless

orphans were sent by their distressed and indignant mother in the garb of sup-

'phants, into the midst of the theatre; the green faction received them with
con­

tempt, the blues with compassion; and this difference, which sunk deep into
the

mind of Theodora, was felt long afterward in the administration of the empire.

As they improved in age and beauty, the three sisters were successively
devoted

to the public and private pleasures of the Byzantine people; and Theodora,
after

following Comito on the stage, in the dress of a slave, with a stool on her
head,

was at length permitted to exercise her independent talents. She neither
danced,

nor sung, nor played on the flute; her skill was confined to the pantomime
arts;

she excelled in buffoon characters, and as often as the comedian swelled her

Maltref, a Jesuit of Thoulouse. in 1663, fur distant from the Louvre press and
the Vatican MS., from which,

however, he obtained tome supplements. His promised commentaries, &c, have
never appeared. The Aga-

thias of Leyden, (1594) has been wisely reprinted by the Paris editor, with
the Latin version of Bonaventura

Vuteanius, a learned interpreter. (Huet. p. 176.)

(1) Agathias in Prafat. p. 7, 8. lib. iv. p. 137. Evagrius, lib. iv. c. 12.
See likewise Ptiotius, cod. 63. p. 65.

(2) Kwpou mijfui (says he, Priefat. ail 1. de Edificiis srspi itris.wiTwv) is
no more than Kvpou irxtSix—a pun! In

these five books, Procopius affects a Christian, as well as a courtly style.

(3) Procopius discloses himself, (Prafat. ad Anecdot. c. 1. 2. 5 ) and the
anecdotes are reckoned as the ninth

book by Smdas. (torn. iti. p. 186. edit. Kuster.) The silence of Evagrius is a
poor objection. Baronius (A. D.

548. No. 24.) regrets the loss of this secret history: it was then in the
Vatican library, in his own custody, and

was first published sixteen years after his death, with the learned, but
partial notes of Nicholas Alemannus.

(Ludg. 1623.)

(4) Justinian an ass—the perfect likeness of Domitian—(Anecdot. c.
8.)—Theodora's lovers driven from her

bed by rival demons—her marriage foretold with a great demon—a monk saw the
prince of the demons, in­

stead of Justinian, on the throne—;the servants who watched, beheld a face
without features, a body walking

without a head, &c. 8cc. Procopius declares his own and his friends1 belief in
these diabolicul stories, (c. 12.)

(5) Montesquieu (Considerations sur la Grandeur et la Decadence des Romains,
c. 20.) gives credit to these

anecdotes, as connected, 1. with the weakness of the empire; and 2. with the
instability of Justinian's laws.

(6) For the life and manners of tiie empress Theodora, see the Anecdotes; more
especially c. 1—5.9—17.,

with the learned notes of Alemannus—a reference to which is always implied.

(7) Comito was afterwards married to Sittas, duke of Armenia, the father
perhaps, at least she might be the

tnother, of the empress Sophia. Two nephews of Theodora may be the sons of
Anastasia. (Aleman. p. 30,31.)

