OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 8Z

plexion of Africa no longer disfigure the most perfect of the human race. It
is

in the adjacent climates of Georgia, Mingrelia, and Circassia, that nature has

placed, at least to our eyes, the model of beauty, in the shape of the limbs,
the

colour of the skin, the symmetry of the features, and the expression of the
coun­

tenance-^) According to the destination of the two sexes, the men seemed

formed for action, the women for love; and the perpetual supply of females
from

Mount Caucasus has purified the blood, and improved the breed, of the southern

nations of Asia. The proper district of Mingrelia, a portion only of the
ancient

Colchos, has long sustained an exportation of twelve thousand slaves. The num­

ber of prisoners and criminals would be inadequate to the annual demand; but
the

common people are in a state of servitude to their lords, the exercise of
fraud or

rapine is unpunished in a lawless community; and the market is continually
reple­

nished by the abuse of civil and paternal authority. Such a trade, (2) which
re­

duces the human species to the level of cattle, may tend to encourage marriage

and population: since the multitude of children enriches their sordid and
inhuman

parent. But this source of impure wealth must inevitably poison the national
man­

ners, obliterate the sense of honour and virtue, and almost extinguish the
instincts

of nature; the Christians of Georgia and Mingrelia are the most dissolute of
man­

kind; and their children, who in a tender age are sold into foreign slavery,
have

already learnt to imitate the rapine of the father and the prostitution of the
mo­

ther. Yet amidst the rudest ignorance, the.untaught natives discover a
singular

dexterity both of mind and hand; and although the want of union and discipline

exposes them to their more powerful neighbours, a bold and intrepid spirit has

animated the Colcliians of every age. In the host of Xerxes, they served on
foot;

and their arms were, a dagger or a javelin, a wooden casque, and a buckler of
raw

hides. But in their own country the use of cavalry has more generally
prevailed:

the meanest of the peasants disdain to walk; the martial nobles are possessed,

perhaps, of two hundred horses; and above five thousand are numbered in the

train of the prince of Mingrelia. The Colchian government has been always a

pure and hereditary kingdom; and the authority of the sovereign is only
restrained

by the turbulence of his subjects. Whenever they were obedient he could lead a

numerous army into the field; but some faith is requisite to believe, that the
sin­

gle tribe of the Suanians was composed of two hundred thousand soldiers, or
that

the population of Mingrelia now amounts to four millions of inhabitants.(3)

It was the boast of the Colchians, that their ancestors had checked the victo­

ries of Sesostris; and the defeat of the Egyptian is less incredible than his
success­

ful progress, as far as the foot of Mount Caucasus. They sunk without any me­

morable effort, under the arms of Cyrus; followed in distant wars the standard
of

the great king, and presented him every fifth year with one hundred boys, and
as-

many virgins, the fairest produce of the land. (4) Yet he accepted this gift
like

the gold and ebony of India, the frankincense of the Arabs, or the negroes and

ivory of Ethiopia: the Colchians were not subject to the dominion of a satrap,
and

they continued to enjoy the name as well as substance of national
independence. (5)

After the fall of the Persian empire, Mithridates, king of Pontus, added
Colchos to

the wide circle of his dominions on the Euxine; and when the natives presumed
to

request that his son might reign over them, he bound the ambitious youth in
chains

of gold, and delegated a servant in his place. In the pursuit of Mithridates,
the

Romans advanced to the banks of the Phasis, and their galleys ascended the
river

till they reached the camp of Pompey and his legions.(6) But the senate, and
af­

terwards the emperors, disdained to reduce that distant and useless conquest
into

(1) Button (Hist. Nat. torn. iii. p. 433—437.) collects the unanimous suffrage
of naturalists and travellers. If.

in the time of Herodotus, they were in truth psya^Kpoic and ou^orp(and he had
observed them with care,)

this precious fact is an example of the influence of climate on a foreign
colony.

(?) The Mingrelian ambassador arrived at Constantinople with two hundred
persons: but be ate (sold) them

day by day, till his retinue was diminished to a secretary and two valets.
(Tavemier, torn, i. p. 365.) _ To pur­

chase his mistress, a Mingrelian gentleman sold twelve priests and his wife to
the Turks. (Chardin, torn. i.

p. 06.)

(3) Strabo, lib. xi. p. 765. Lamberti, Relation de la Mingrelie. Yet we must
avoid the contrary extreme of

Chardin, who allows no more than twenty thousand inhabitants to supply an
annual exportation of twelve

thousand slaves, an absurdity unworthy of that judicious traveller.

(4) Herodot. lib. iii. e. 97. See, in lib. vii. c. 79. their arms and service
in the expedition of Xerxes against

Greece.

(5) Xenophon, who had encountered the Colchians in his retreat (Anabasis, lib.
iv. p. S20. 343. 348. edit.

Hutchinson; and Foster's Dissertation, p. 53—58, in Spelroan's English
version, vol. ii.) styles them aoTovopci,

Before the conquest of Mithridates, they are named by Appian ifi«s •***jww<s
(de Bell. Mithridatico. c. 15. torn,

i. p. 661. of thelast and best edition, by John Schweighssuser, Lypsse. 1785,
3 vole, large octavo.)

(6) The conquest of Colchis by Mithridates and Pompey, is marked by Appian (de
Bell. Mithridat.) and

Plutarch (in Vit.Pomp.)

