THE DECLINE AND FALL

bards through unknown regions and marvellous adventures. About the time of

Augustus and Trajan, a ray of historic light breaks on the darkness of their
anti­

quities, and they are discovered, for the first time!, between the Elbe and
the Oder.

Fierce, beyond the example of the Germans, they delighted to propagate the
tre-

mendous belief, that their heads were formed like the heads of dogs, and that
they

drank the blood of their enemies whom they vanquished in battle. The smallness

of their numbers was recruited by the adoption of their bravest slaves; and
alone,

amidst their powerful neighbours, they defended by arms their high-spirited
inde­

pendence. In the tempests of the north, which overwhelmed so many names and

nations, this little bark of the Lombards still floated on the surface: they
gradually

descended towards the south and the Danube; and at the end of four hundred
years

they again appear with their ancient valour and renown. Their manners were

not less ferocious. The assassination of a royal guest was executed in the
pre­

sence, and by the command, of the king's daughter, who had been provoked by

some words of insult, and disappointed by his diminutive stature; and a
tribute, the

price of blood, was imposed on the Lombards, by his brother, the king of the
He-

ruli. Adversity revived a sense of moderation and justice, and the insolence
of

conquest was chastised by the signal defeat and irreparable dispersion of the
Heru-

li, who were seated in the southern provinces of Poland.(l) The victories of
the

Lombards recommended them to the friendship of the emperors; and at the soli­

citation of Justinian, they passed the Danube, to reduce, according to their
treaty,

the cities of Noricum and the fortresses of Pannonia. But the spirit of rapine
soon

tempted them beyond these ample limits; they wandered along the coast of the

Hadriatic as far as Dyrrachium, and presumed, with familiar rudeness, to enter

the towns and houses of their Roman allies, and to seize the captives who had
es­

caped from their audacious hands. These acts of hostility, the sallies, as it
might

be pretended, of some loose adventurers, were disowned by the nation, and
excused

by the emperor; but the arms of the Lombards were more seriously engaged by a

contest of thirty years, which was terminated only by the extirpation of the
Gepi-

dae. The hostile nations often pleaded their cause before the throne of
Constanti­

nople; and the crafty Justinian, to whom the barbarians were almost equally
odious,

renounced a partial and ambiguous sentence, and dexterously protracted the war

y slow and ineffectual succours. Their strength was formidable, since the Lom­

bards, who sent into the field several myriads of soldiers, still claimed, as
the

weaker side, the protection of the Romans. Their spirit was intrepid; yet such
is

the uncertainty of courage, that the two armies were suddenly struck with a
pa­

nic: they fled from each other, and the rival kings remained with their guards
in

the midst of an empty plain. A short truce was obtained; but their mutual
resent­

ment again kindled; and the remembrance of their shame rendered the next en­

counter more desperate and bloody. Forty thousand of the barbarians perished
in

the decisive battle, which broke the power of the Gepidsc, transferred the
fears

and wishes of Justinian, and first displayed the character of Alboin, the
youthful

prince of the Lombards, and the future conqueror of Italy. (2)

The wild people, who dwelt or wandered in the plains of Russia, Lithuania, and

Poland, might be reduced, in the age of Justinian, under the two great
families of

the Bulgarians(S) and the Sclavonians. According to the Greek writers,

the former, who touched the Euxine and the lake of Msotis, derived from the

Huns their name or descent; and it is needless to renew the simple and well-

known picture of Tartar manners. They were bold and dexterous archers, who

drank the milk, and feasted on the flesh of their fleet and indefatigable
horses;

whose flocks and herds followed, or rather guided, the motions of their roving

camps; to whose inroads no country was remote or impervious, and who were

practised in flight, though incapable of fear. The nation was divided into two

powerful and hostile tribes, who pursued each other with fraternal hatred.
They

eagerly disputed the friendship, or rather the gifts of the emperor; and the
dis-

(1) Two facts in the narrative of Paul Diaconns (lib. i. c. 20.) arc
expressive of national manners.—1. Dum

ttdtabuhtm luderet—while he played at draughts. 2. Camporum viridantia Una.
Toe cultivation of flax sup­

poses property, commerce, agriculture, and manufactures.

t (2) I have used, without undertaking to reconcile the facts in Proeopius
(Goth. lib. it. c. 14. lib. iii. e. 33,34.

lib. iv. c. 18—25.) Paul Diaconns (de Geslis Langobard lib. i. c. 1—23. in
Muratori, Script, Rerum Itaticarum,

torn. i. p. 405—419.,) and Jornandes (de Success. Regnorum, p. 242.) The
patient reader may draw some light

from Mascou(Hist. of the Germans, and Annotat. 23.) and de Buat (Hist, des
Peuplei, See. torn. 9—11.)

(3) I adopt the appellation of Bulgarians, from Ennodiui (in Panegyr,
Theodorici, Opp. Sirmoud, torn. i.

p. 1598, 1599.,) Jornandes. (de Rebus Gclicis, c. v. p. 194. et de Regn. Succ*
stione, p. 242..) Theuphanes (p.

185., and the Chronicles of Catsiodunis and Marcellinus. The name of Huns is
too vague; the tribes of the

Cutturgurians and Utturgurians are too minute and too harsh.

