150 THE DECLINE AND FALL

primitive Romans were infected by the example of the Etruscans(l) and
Greeks:(2)

in the mad abuse of prosperity and power, every pleasure that is innocent was

deemed insipid; and the Scatinian law,(3) which had been extorted by an act of

violence, was insensibly abolished by the lapse of time and the multitude of
cri­

minals. By this law, the rape, perhaps the seduction, of an ingenuous youth,
was

compensated, as a personal injury, by the poor damages of ten thousand
sesterces,

or fourscore pounds; the ravisher might be slain by the resistance or revenge
of

chastity; and I wish to believe, that at H»me, as in Athens, the voluntary and
ef­

feminate deserter of his sex was degraded from the honours and the rights of a

citizen. (4) But the practice of vice was not discouraged by the severity of
opi­

nion: the indelible stain of manhood was confounded with the more venial
trans- .

gressions of fornication and adultery, nor was the licentious lover exposed to
the

same dishonour which he impressed on the male or female partner of his guilt.

From Catullus to Juvenal,(5) the poets accuse and celebrate the degeneracy of

the times, and the reformation of manners was feebly attempted by the reason
and

authority of the civilians, till the most virtuous of the Caesars proscribed
the sin

against nature as a crime against society. (6)

A new spirit of legislation, respectable even in its error, arose in the
empire

with the religion of Constantine.(7) The laws of Moses were received as the

divine original of justice, and the Christian princes adapted their penal
statutes to

the degrees of moral anc) religious turpitude. Adultery was first declared to
be a

capital offence; the frailty of the sexes was assimilated to poison or
assassination,

to sorcery, or parricide; the same penalties were inflicted on the passive and
ac­

tive guilt of paederasty; and all criminals of free or servile condition were
either

drowned or beheaded, or cast alive into the avenging flames. The adulterers

were spared by the common sympathy of mankind; but the lovers of their own

sex were pursued by general and pious indignation; the impure manners of
Greece

still prevailed in the cities of Asia, and every vice was fomented by the
celibacy

of the monks and clergy. Justinian relaxed the punishment at least of female
in­

fidelity; the guilty spouse was only condemned to solitude and penance, and at
the

end of two years she might be recalled to the arms of a forgiving husband. But

the same emperor declared himself the implacable enemy of unmanly lust, and

the cruelty or his persecution can scarcely be excused by the purity of his
mo­

tives. (8) In defiance of every principle of justice, he stretched to past as
well

as future offences the operations of his edicts, with the previous allowance
of a

short respite for confession and pardon. A painful death was inflicted by the
am­

putation of the sinful instrument, or the insertion of sharp reeds into the
pores

and tubes of most exquisite sensibility; and Justinian defended the propriety
of '

the execution, since the criminals would have lost their hands had they been
con­

victed of sacrilege. In this state of disgrace and agony, two bishops, Isaiah
of

Rhodes, and Alexander of Diospolis, were dragged through the streets of Con­

stantinople, while their brethren were admonished by the voice of a crier, to
ob­

serve this awful lesson, and not to pollute the sanctity of their character.
Per­

haps these prelates were innocent. A sentence of death and infamy was often

(1) Timon (lib. i.) and Theopompus (lib. xliii. apud Alheneum, lib. xii. p.
517.) describe the luxury and hut

of the Etruscans: sroxu it;v toi yt vxipvrt owomi yratttri xxi to*;
jttEipKiuoi,-. About the same period (A. TJ.

C. 445..) the Roman youth studied in Ctruria (Lib. ix. 36.)

(2) The Persians had been corrupted in the same school: airEyyuvai'.wtSovrf;
nxitrt xxt pprytvTixi (Herodot. lib.

i. c. 131.) A curious dissertation might be formed on the introduction of
Pederasty after the time of Homer

its progress amonp; the Greeks of A sia and Europe, the vehemence of their
passions, and the thin device of

virtue and friendship which amused the philosophers of Athens. But, scelera
ostendi oportet dum puniuntur

abscondi flagitia. '

(3) The name, the date, and the provisions of this law, are equally doubtful
(Gravina, Opp. p. 432 433.

Heineccius, Hist. Jure. Rom. No. 108. Ernesti, Clav. Ciceron. in Indice
Leguin.) But I will observe'that

the nefanda Venus of the honest German is styled aversa by the more polite
Italian.

^(4) See the Oration of Aschines against the catamite Timarchus (in Reitke,
Orator. Grsec. torn. ii. p.

(5) A crowd of disgraceful passages will force themselves on the memory of the
classic reader: I will only

remind hin of the cool declaration of Ovid— 7

Odi concubitus qui non utrumque resolvunt.

Hoc est quod puerum tangar amore minus.

(6) jElius, Lampridiils, in Vit. Heliogabal, in Hist. August, p. 112.,
Aurelius Victor, in Philippo, Codex The-

odos. lib. ix. tit. 7. leg. vii., and Godefroy's Commentary, torn. iii. p. 63.
Theodosius abolished the subteria-

neous brothels of Rome,in which the prostitution of both sexes was acted with
impunity.

(7) See thelaws of Conitantine and his successor against adultery, sodomy,
tic. in the Theodosian (lib. ix

tit. 7. leg. tn. lib. xi. tit. 36. leg. i. 4.) and Justinian Codes (lib. ix.
tit. 9. leg. 30, 31.) These princes sneak the

language of passion as well asof justice, and fraudulently ascribe their own
severity to the first Ciesan

(8) Justinian, Novel. 77.134. 141. Procopius. in Anecdot. c. xi. 16. with the
Notes of Aleraannus. 'Theo-

phanes, p. 151. Cedrenus, p. 388. Zona res, lib. xiv. p. 64.

