10-1 THE DECLINE AND FALL

of the Gothic kingdom: the senate and people were restored to their country;
the

means of subsistence were liberally provided; and Totila, in the robe of
peace,

exhibited the equestrian games of the circus. Whilst he amused the eyes of the

multitude, four hundred vessels were prepared for the embarkation of his
troops.

The cities of Rhegium and Tarentum were reduced: he passed into Sicily, the
ob­

ject of his implacable resentment, and the island was stripped of its gold and
sil­

ver, of the fruits of the earth, and of an infinite number of horses, sheep,
and

oxen. Sardinia and Corsica obeyed the fortune of Italy; and the sea-coast of

Greece was visited by a fleet of three hundred galleys. (1) The Goths were

landed in Corcyra and the ancient continent of Epirus; they advanced as far as

Nicopolis, the trophy of Augustus, and Dodona,(2) once favoured by the oracle

of Jove. In every step of his victories the wise barbarian repeated to
Justinian

his desire of peace, applauded the concord of their predecessors, and offered
to

employ the Gothic arms in the service of the empire.

Justinian was deaf to the voice of peace; but he neglected the prosecution of
war;

and the indolence of his temper disappointed, in some degree, the obstinacy of
his

passions. From this salutary slumber the emperor was awakened by the pope

Vigilius and the patrician Cethegus, who appeared before his throne, and
adjured

him, in the name of God and the people, to resume the conquest and deliverance

of Italy. In the choice of the generals, caprice as well as judgment was
shown.

A fleet and army sailed for the relief of Sicily under the conduct of
Liberius; but

his youth and want of experience were afterwards discovered, and before he

touched the shores of the island, he was overtaken by his successor. In the
place

of Liberius, the conspirator Artaban was raised from a prison to military
honours;

in the pious presumption, that gratitude would animate his valour and fortify
his

allegiance. Belisarius reposed in the shade of his laurels, but the command

of the principal army was reserved for Germanus,(3) the emperor's nephew,

whose rank and merit had been long depressed by the jealousy of the court.

Theodora had injured him in the rights of a private citizen, the marriage of
his

children, and the testament of his brother; and although his conduct was pure

and blameless, Justinian was displeased that he should be thought worthy of
the

confidence of the malecontents. The life of Germanus was alesson of implicit
obe­

dience ; he nobly refused to prostitute his name and character in the factions
of the

circus: the gravity of his manners was tempered by innocent cheerfulness; and
his

riches were lent without interest to indigent or deserving friends. His valour

had formerly triumphed over the Sclavonians of the Danube and the rebels of
Af­

rica: the first report of his promotion revived the hopes of the Italians: and
he was

privately assured, that a crowd of Roman deserters would abandon, on his ap­

proach, the standard of Totila.

His second marriage with Malasontha, the grand-daughter of Theodoric, en­

deared Germanus to the Goths themselves; and they marched with reluctance

against the father of a royal infant, the last offspring of the line of
Amali.(4) A

splendid allowance was assigned by the emperor: the general contributed his
pri­

vate fortune; his two sons were popular and active; and he surpassed in the
promp­

titude and success of his levies, the expectation of mankind. He was permitted

to select some squadrons of Thracian cavalry: the veterans as well as the
youth of

Constantinople and Europe, engaged their voluntary service; and as far as the

heart of Germany, his fame and liberality attracted the aid of the barbarians.

The Romans advanced to Sardica; an army of Sclavonians fled before their
march;

but within two days of their final departure, the designs of Germanus were
termi­

nated by his malady and death. Yet the impulse which he had given to the Ita­

lian war still continued to act with energy and efl'ect. The maritime towns,
An-

dini, Roma Antica, lib. Til. c. 9. p. 466. Donatui, Roma Antique, lib. it. c.
13. p. 334. But all antiquity is ig­

norant of this relic.

(1) In these seas, Proeopius searched without success for the isle of Calypso.
He was shown at Phasacia or

Corcyra. the petrified ship of Ulysses; (OiItm. xiii. 163..) but he found it a
recent fabric of many stones, de­

dicated by a merchant to Jupiter Cassiut, (lib. ir. c. 22.) Eustathius had
supposed it to be the fanciful likeness

of a rock.

(2) M. d'Anville (Memoirei de l'Acad. torn, xxxii. p. 513—528. illustrates the
gulf of Ambracia; but he

cannot ascertain the situation of Dodona. A country in sight of Italy is less
known than the wilds of

America.

(3) See the acts of Germanus in the public (Vandal, lib. ii. c. 1(1—18. Goth.
lib. iii. c. 31, 32.) and private

history (Anecdot. c. v..) and those of his son Justin, in Agathias (lib. ir.
c. 130,131.) Kotwitbstanding an

ambiguous expression of Jornandes, fratri suo, Alemannus nas proved that he
was the son of the emperor's

brother.

(4) Confuncta Aniciorura gens cum Amala stirpe spem adhnc utriutque generis
promittit, (Jornandes, c. bt.

p. 703. He wrote at Ravenna before the death of Totila,

