H THE DECLINE AND FALL

long vigils and abstemious diet. When his first transports had subsided, she
still

maintained the same ascendant over his mind, by the more solid merit of temper

and understanding. Justinian delighted to ennoble and enrich the object of his

affection; the treasures of the east were poured at her feet, and the nephew
of

Justin was determined, perhaps by religious scruples, to bestow on his
concubine

the sacred and legal character of a wife. But the laws of Rome expressly pro­

hibited the marriage of a senator with any female who had been dishonoured by
a

servile origin or theatrical profession: the empress Lupicina, or Euphemia, a
bar­

barian of rustic manners, but of irreproachable virtue, refused to accept a
prosti­

tute for her niece: and even Vigilantia, the superstitious mother of
Justinian,

though she acknowledged the wit and beauty of Theodora, was seriously appre­

hensive, lest the levity and arrogance of that artful paramour might corrupt
the

piety and happiness of her son. These obstacles were removed by the inflexible

constancy of Justinian. He patiently expected the death of the empress; he de­

spised the tears of his mother, who soon sunk under the weight of her
affliction,

and a law was promulgated in the name of the emperor Justin, which abolished

the rigid jurisprudence of antiquity. A glorious repentance (the words of the

edict) was left open for the unhappy females who had prostituted their persons
on

the theatre, and they were permitted to contract a legal union with the most
illus­

trious of the Romans. (1) This indulgence was speedily followed by the solemn

nuptials of Justinian and Theodora; her dignity was gradually exalted with
that

of her lover; and, as soon as Justin had invested his nephew with the purple,
the

patriarch of Constantinople placed the diadem on the heads of the emperor and

empress of the east. But the usual honours which the severity of Roman manners

had allowed to the wives of princes, could not satisfy either the ambition of
The­

odora, or the fondness of Justinian. He seated her on the throne as an equal
and

independent colleague in the sovereignty of the empire, and an oath of
allegiance

was imposed on the governors of the provinces in the joint names of Justinian

and Theodora. (2) The eastern world fell prostrate before the genius and
fortune

of the daughter of Acacius. The prostitute who, in the presence of innumerable

spectators had polluted the theatre of Constantinople, was adored as a queen
in

the same city, by grave magistrates, orthodox bishops, victorious generals,
and

captive monarchs. (3)

Those who believe that the female mind is totally depraved by the loss of
chas­

tity, will eagei-ly listen to all the invectives of private envy or popular
resentment,

which have dissembled the virtues of Theodora, exaggerated her vices, and con­

demned with rigour the venal or voluntary sins of the youthful harlot. From a

motive of shame or contempt, she often declined the servile homage of the
multi­

tude, escaped from the odious light of the capital, and passed the greatest
part of

the year in the palaces and gardens which were pleasantly seated on the sea-
coast

of the Propontis and the Bosphorus. Her private hours were devoted to the pru­

dent as well as grateful care of her beauty, the luxury of the bath and table,
and

the long slumber of the evening and the morning. Her secret apartments were

occupied by the favourite women and eunuchs, whose interests and passions she

indulged at the expense of justice; the most illustrious personages of the
state

were crowded into a dark and sultry antichamber, and when at last, after a
tedious

attendance, they were admitted to kiss the feet of Theodora, they experienced,

as her humour might suggest, the silent arrogance of an empress, or the
capricious

levity of a comedian. Her rapacious avarice to accumulate an immense treasure,

may be excused by the apprehension of her husband's death, which could leave

no alternative between ruin arid the throne; and fear as well as ambition
might ex­

asperate Theodora against two generals, who, during a malady of the emperor,

had rashly declared that they were not disposed to acquiesce in the choice of
the

capital. But the reproach of cruelty, so repugnant even to her softer vices,
has

left an indelible stain on the memory of Theodora. Her numerous spies
observed,

and zealously reported, every action, word, or look, injurious to their royal
mistress.

(1) See the old law in Justinian's Code, (lib. v. tit. 5. leg. vii. tit.
27.lee. 1.) tinder the years 336 and 454. Tire

new edict (about the year 5S1 or 523. Aleman. p. 38.96.) very awkwardly
repeals no more than the clause of

mulieres sccnkcc, libertinse, tabernarias. See the novels 89 and 117, and a
Greek rescript from Justinian to the

bishops. (Aleman. p. 41.)

f2)Iswear by the Father, 8cc, by the Virgin Mary, by the four Gospels, quae in
tnanitrus teneo, and by'the

holy archangels Michael and Gabriel, puram conscientiam germamimque serviiium
me servatarom, sacratini-

mis DDNN. Justiniano et Theodoras conjugi ejus (novel, viii. tit. 3.) Would
the oath have been binding ia fa­

vour of the widow? Communes tituli et trinmphi, Sec. (Aleman. p. 47,48.)

(3) M Let greatness own her, and she's mean no more." &c.

Without Warburton's critical telescope, I should never have seen, ia the
general picture of triumphant vice,

any personal allusion to Theodora.

