OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 167

Autharis received the cup in his turn, and, in restoring it to the princess,
he se­

cretly touched her hand, and drew his own finger over his face and lips. In
the

evening, Theudelinda imparted to her nurse the indiscreet familiarity of the

stranger; and was comforted by the assurance, that such boldness could proceed

only from the king her husband, who, by his beauty and courage, appeared wor­

thy of her love. The ambassadors were dismissed; no sooner did they reach the

confines of Italy, than Autharis, raising himself on his horse, darted his
battle

axe against a tree with incomparable strength and dexterity. " Such," said he
to

the astonished Bavarians, " such are the strokes of the king of the Lombards."

On the approach of a French army, Garibald and his daughter took refuge in

the dominions of their ally; and the marriage was consummated in the pa­

lace of Verona. At the end of one year, it was dissolved by the death of

Autharis: but the virtues of Theudelinda(l) had endeared her to the nation,
and

she was permitted to bestow, with her hand, the sceptre of the Italian
kingdom.

From this fact, as well as from similar events,(2) it is certain that the
Lombards

possessed freedom to elect their sovereign, and sense to decline the frequent
use of

that dangerous privilege. The public revenue arose from the produce of land,

and the profits of justice. When the independent dukes agreed that Autharis

should ascend the throne of his father, they endowed the regal office with a
fair

moiety of their respective domains. The proudest nobles aspired to the honours

of servitude near the person of their prince: he rewarded the fidelity of his
vas­

sals by the precarious gift of pensions and benefices; and atoned for the
injuries of

war, by the rich foundation of monasteries and churches. In peace a judge, a

leader in war, he never usurped the powers of a sole and absolute legislator.
The

king of Italy convened the national assemblies in the palace, or more probably

in the fields of Pavia: his great council was composed of the persons most
emi­

nent by their birth and dignities; but the. validity, as well as the
execution, of their

decrees, depended on the approbation of the faithful people, the fortunate
army

of the Lombards. About fourscoreyears after the conquest of Italy, their
tradi­

tional customs were transcribed in Teutonic Latin, (3) and ratified by the
consent

of prince and people: some new regulations were introduced, more suitable to
their

present condition; the example of Rotharis was imitated by the wisest of his
suc­

cessors, and the laws of the Lombards have been esteemed the least imperfect

of the barbaric codes.(4) Secure by their courage in the possession of
liberty,

these rude and hasty legislators were incapable of balancing the powers of the
con­

stitution, or of discussing the nice theory of political government. Such
crimes as

"threatened the life of the sovereign, or the safety of the state, were
adjudged wor­

thy of death; but their attention was principally confined to the defence of
the per­

son and property of the subject. According to the strange jurisprudence of the

times, the guilt of blood might be redeemed by a fine; yet the high price of
nine

hundred pieces of gold declares a just sense of the value of a simple citizen.
Less

atrocious injuries, a wound, a fracture, a blow, an opprobrious word, were
mea­

sured with scrupulous and almost ridiculous diligence; and the prudence of the
le­

gislator encouraged the ignoble practice of bartering honour, and revenge for
a pe­

cuniary compensation. The ignorance of the Lombards, in the state of pagan­

ism or Christianity, gave implicit credit to the malice and mischief of
witchcraft,

but the judges of the seventeenth century might have been instructed and con­

founded by the wisdom of Rotharis, who derides the absurd superstition, and
pro­

tects the wretched victims, of popular or judicial cruelty.(5) The same spirit

of a legislator, superior to his age and country, may be ascribed to
Luitprand, who

condemns, while he tolerates, the impious and inveterate abuse of duels, (6)
obi-

(1) Giannone (Istoria Civile de Napoli, torn. i. p. 263.) has justly censured
the impertinence of Boccaccio

(Gio. 3. Novel 2.,) who, without right, or truth, or pretence, has given the
pious queen Theudelinda to the

arms of a muleteer.

(2) Panl, lib. iii. c. 18. The first dissertations of Muratori, and the first
volume of Giannooe's history, may

be consulted for the state of the kingdom of Italy.

(3) The most accurate edition of the laws of the Lombards is to lie found in
the Scriptores Rerum Italics *

mm, torn. i. part 2. p. 1—181. collated from the most ancient MSS.and
illustrated by the critical notes of

Muratori. ... .,

(4) Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, lib. xxviii. e. 1. Les loix des Bourguignons
J0nt assei judicieuses: cellea

de Rotharis et des autres princes Lombards le font encore plus.

(5) See Leges Rotharis, No. 379. p. 47. Sirica is used as the name of a witch.
It u of the purest classic sr»

gin (Horat. epod. v. 20. Petron. c. 134.;) and, from the words «f Petronius,
(que; striges_ comederunt nervos

tuos?) it may be inferred that the prejudice was of Italian rather than
barbaric extraction.

(6) Quia ineerte suraus de j udicio Dei, et multos audivimus per pugnam sine j
usta causa suam eausam per*

dere. Sed propter consuetudinem gentem nostrain Langohardorum legem impiam
vetare non posjumtu. See*

p. 74. No. 65. of the Laws of Luitprand, promulgated A. D- 724.

