OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

vihces under his civil jurisdiction. The number of their subordinate officers,

clerks, messengers, or assistants, was minutely expressed; three hundred and

ninety-six for the prefect himself, fifty for each of his vicegerents; and the
rigid

definition of their fees and salaries was more effectual to confirm the right,
than

to prevent the abuse. These magistrates might be oppressive, but they were not

idle: and the subtle questions of justice and revenue were infinitely
propagated un­

der the new government, which professed to revive the freedom and equity of
the

Roman republic. The conqueror was solicitous to exact a prompt and plentiful

supply from his African subjects; and he allowed them to claim, even in the
third

degree, and from the collateral line, the houses and lands of which their
families

"had been unjustly despoiled by the Vandals. After the departure of
Belisarius,

"who acted by a high and special commission, no ordinary provision was made
for

a master-general of the forces; but the office of pretorian prefect was
intrusted to

a soldier; the civil and military powers were united, according to the
practice of

Justinian, in the chief governor; and the representative of the emperor in
Africa,

as well as in Italy, was soon distinguished by the appellation of Exarch. (1)

Yet the conquest of Africa was imperfect, till her former sovereign was deli­

vered, either alive or dead, into the hands of the Romans. Doubtful of the
event,

Gelimer had given secret orders that a part of his treasure should be
transported

to Spain, where he hoped to find a secure refuge at the court of the king of
the

Visigoths. But these intentions were disappointed by accident, treachery, and
the

indefatigable pursuit of his enemies, who intercepted his flight from the sea-
shore,

and chased the unfortunate monarch, with some faithful followers, to the
inacces­

sible mountain of Papua,(2) in the inland country of Numidia. He was immedi­

ately besieged by Pharas, an officer whose truth and sobriety were the more
ap­

plauded, as such qualities could seldom be found among the Heruli, the most
cor­

rupt of the barbarian tribes. To his vigilance Belisarius had intrusted this
impor­

tant charge; and, after a bold attempt to scale the mountain, in which he lost
a

hundred and ten soldiers, Pharas expected, during a winter siege, the
operation

of distress and famine on the mind of the Vandal king. From the softest habits
of

pleasure, from the unbounded command of industry and wealth, he was reduced

to share the poverty of the Moors,(3) supportable only to themselves by their
ig­

norance of a happier condition. In their rude hovels of mud and hurdles, which

confined the smoke and excluded the light, they promiscuously slept on the
ground,

perhaps on a sheep-skio, with their wives, their children, and their cattle.
Sor­

did and scanty were their garments; the use of bread and wine was unknown; and

their oaten or barley cakes, imperfectly baked in the ashes, were devoured
almost

in a crude state by the hungry savages. The health of Gelimer must have sunk

\inder these strange and unwonted hardships, from whatsoever cause they had

been endured; but his actual misery was imbittered by the recollection of past

greatness, the daily insolence of his protectors, and the just apprehension,
that the

light and venal Moors might be tempted to betray the rights of hospitality.
The

knowledge of his situation dictated the humane and friendly epistle of
Pharas.—

Like yourself (said the chief of the Heruli) I am an illiterate barbarian, but
I

speak the language of plain sense, and an honest heart. Why will you persist
in

hopeless obstinacy? Why will you ruin yourself, your family, and nation? The

love of freedom and abhorrence of slavery? Alas! my dearest Gelimer, are you

not already the worst of slaves, the slave of the vile nation of the Moors?
Would

it not be preferable to sustain at Constantinople a life of poverty and
servitude, ra­

ther than to reign the undoubted monarch of the mountain of Papua? Do you

think it a disgrace to be the subject of Justinian? Belisarius is his subject;
and we

ourselves, whose birth is not inferior to your own, are not ashamed of our
obedience

to the Roman emperor. That generous prince will grant you a rich inheritance

of lands, a place in the senate, and the dignity of a patrician: such are his
gracious

intentions, and you may depend with full assurance on the word of Belisarius.
So

long as Heaven lias condemned us to suffer, patience is a virtue; but if we
reject

the proffered deliverance, it degenerates into blind and stupid despair."—"I
am

(1) The African laws of Justinian are illustrated by his German biographer
(Cod. lib. i. tit. 27. Novel. 36,37.

131. Vit. Justinian, p. 349—377.)

(2) Mount Papua is placed by d'Anville (torn. Hi. p. 92. and Tabul. Imp. Horn.
Occident.,) near Hippo Ke-

gius and the sea; yet this situation ill agrees with the long pursuit beyond
Hippo, and the words of Procopius

(sib. ii. c. 4.,) fv to*,- KtotuSnos 6CZs*T0I?.

(3) Shaw (Travels, p. 220.) most accurately represents the manners of the
Bedoweens and Kabyles, the last

of whom, by their language, are the remnant of the Moors: yet how changed—how
civilized are these modem

savages.' provisions arc plenty among them, and bread is common.

