OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

lie discovered the necessity of purifying his gold from the mixture of baser
alloy.

Six years had not elapsed from the publication of the Code, before he
condemned

the imperfect attempt, by a new and more accurate edition of the same work,

•which he enriched with two hundred of his own laws, and fifty decisions of
the

darkest and more intricate points of jurisprudence. Every year, or, according

to Procopius, each day of his long reign, was marked by some legal innovation.

Many of his acts were rescinded by himself; many were rejected by his
successors,

many have been obliterated by time; but the number of sixteen edicts, and one

hundred and sixty-eight novels,(1) has been admitted into the authentic body
of

the civil jurisprudence. In the opinion of a philosopher, superior to the pre­

judices of his profession, these incessant, and for the most part trifling,
altera­

tions, can be only explained by the venal spirit of a prince, who sold without

shame his judgments and his laws. (2) The charge of the secret historian is

indeed explicit and vehement; but the sole instance, which he produces, may be

ascribed to the devotion as well as to the avarice of Justinia. A wealthy
bigot had

bequeathed his inheritance to the church of Emesa; and its value was enhanced
by

the dexterity of an artist, who subscribed confessions of debt and promises of
pay­

ment with the names of the richest Syrians. They pleaded the established pre­

scription of thirty or forty years; but their defence was overruled by a
retrospec­

tive edict, which extended the claims of the church to the term of a century;
an

edict so pregnant with injustice and disorder, that after serving this
occasional pur­

pose, it was prudently abolished in the same reign. (3) If candour will acquit
the

emperor himself, and transfer the corruption to his wife and favourites, the
suspi­

cion of so foul a vice must still degrade the majesty of his laws: and the
advocates

of Justinian may acknowledge, that such levity, whatsoever be the motive, is
un­

worthy of a legislator and a man.

Monarchs seldom condescend to become the preceptors of their subjects; and

some praise is due to Justinian, by whose command an ample system was reduced

to a short and elementary treatise. Among the various institutes of the Roman

law, (4) those of Caius(5) were the most popular in the east and west; and
their

use may be considered as an evidence of their merit. They were selected by the

imperial delegates, Tribonian, Theophilus, and Dorotheus: and the freedom and

purity of the Antonines was incrusted with the coarser materials of a
degenerate

age. The same volume which introduced the youth of Rome, Constantinople, and

Berytus, to the gradual study of the Code and Pandects, is still precious to
the

historian, the philosopher, and the magistrate. The institutes of Justinian
are

divided into four books; they proceed, with no contemptible method, from, I.
Per­

sons, to II. Things, and from things, to III. Actions; and the article IV. of
Pri­

vate Wrongs, is terminated by the principles of Criminal Laws.

I. The distinction of ranks and persons, is the firmest basis of a mixed and
li­

mited government. In France, the remains of liberty are kept alive by the
spirit,

the honours, and even the prejudices, of fifty thousand nobles. (6) Two
hundred

families supply, in lineal descent, the second branch of the English
legislature,

which maintains, between the king and commons, the balance of the
constitution.

A gradation of patricians and plebeians, of strangers and subjects, has
supported

the aristocracy of Genoa, Venice, and ancient Rome. The perfect equality of

men is the point in which the extremes of democracy and despotism are con­

founded, since the majesty of the prince or people would be offended, if any
heads

were exalted above the level of their fellow-slaves or fellow-citizens. In the
de-

(1) Novella ij a classic adjective, bat a barbarous substantive (Ludewig, p.
245.) Justinian never collected

tbem himself: the nine collations, the legal standard of modern tribunals,
consists of ninety-eight novels; but

the number was increased by the diligence of Julian, Haloander, and Comius
(Ludewig, p. 249. 258. Aleman.

Not. in Anecdot. p. 98.)

(2) Montesquieu, Considerations sur la Grandeur et la Decadence des Remains,
c. 20. torn. iii. p. Ml. in 4to.

On this occasion he throws aside the gown and cap of a president a Mortier.

(3) Procopius, Anecdotic. 28. A similar privilege was granted to the church of
Rome (NoveL 9.) For the

general repeal of these mischievous indulgences, see Novel. 111. and edict. 5.

(4) Lactantius, in his Institutes of Christianity, an elegant and specious
work, proposes to imitate the title

and method of the civilians. Quidam prudemes et arbitri tequitatis
Institufiones Civilis Juris compositas edir

derunt (Institut. Divin. lib. i. c. 1.) Such as Ulpian. Paul, Florentius,
Mareian.

(5) The emperor Justinian calls him suum, though he died before the end of the
second century. His In­

stitutes are quoted by Servius. Boethius, Priscian, &c. and the Epitome by
Arinn is still extant: (see the pro­

legomena and notes to the edition of Schulting, in the Jurisprudentia Ante-
Justinianea, Lugd. Bat. 1717.

Heineccius, Hist. J. R. No. 313. Ludewig, in Vit. Just. p. 109.)

(6) See the Annates Politiques de l'abbe tie St. Pierre, torn. i. p. 25., who
dates in the year 1735. The most

ancient families claim the immemorial possession of arms and fiefs. Since the
crusades, some, the roost truly

respectable, have been created by the king, for merit and services. The recent
and vulgar crowd is derived

sTrom the multitude of venal offices, without trust or dignity, which
continually ennoble the wealthy plebeians.

