OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

prince of the Lombards disdained the ancient glories of Milan; and Pavia,
during

some ages, was respected as the capital of the kingdom of Italy. (1)

The reign of the founder was splendid and transient; and before he could regu­

late his new conquests, Alboin fell a sacrifice to domestic treason and female
re­

venge. In a palace near Verona, which had not been erected for the barbarians,

he feasted the companions of his arms; intoxication was the reward of valour,
and

the king himself was tempted by appetite, or vanity, to exceed the ordinary
mea­

sure of his intemperance. After draining many capacious bowls of Rhxtian or

Falernian wine he called for the skull of Cunipund, the noblest and most
precious

ornament of his sideboard. The cup of victory was accepted with horrid
applause

by the circle of the Lombard chiefs. * " Fill it again with wine, (exclaimed
the

inhuman conqueror,) fill it to the brim; carry this goblet to the queen, and
request

in my name that she would rejoice with her father." In an agony of grief and

rage, Rosamond had strength to utter, Let the will of my Lord be obeyed! and,

touching it with her lips, pronounced a silent imprecation, that the insult
should

be washed away in the blood of Alboin. Some indulgence might be due to the re­

sentment of a daughter, if she had not already violated the duties of a wife.
Im­

placable in her enmity, or inconstant in her love, the queen of Italy had
stooped

from the throne to the arms of a subject, and Helmichis, the king's armour-
bearer,

was the secret minister of her pleasure and revenge. Against the proposal of

the murder he could no longer urge the scruples of fidelity or gratitude; but
Hel­

michis trembled, when he revolved the, danger, as well as the guilt, when he
re­

collected the matchless strength and intrepidity of a warrior, whom he had so
of­

ten attended in the field of battle. He pressed and obtained that one of the
bra­

vest champions of the Lombards should be associated to the enterprise; but no

more than a promise of secrecy could be drawn from the gallant Peredeus; and

the mode of seduction employed by Rosamond betrays her shameless insensibility

both, to honour and love. She supplied the place of one of her female
attendants,

who was beloved by Peredeus, and contrived some excuse for darkness and
silencey

till she could inform her companion that he had enjoyed the queen of the Lom­

bards, and that his own death, or the death of Alboin, must be the consequence
of

such treasonable adultery. In this alternative, he chose rather to be the
accomplice

than the victim of Rosamond,(2) whose Undaunted spirit was incapable of fear
or

remorse. She expected, and soon found, a favourable moment, when the king,

oppressed with wine, had retired from the table to his afternoon slumbers. His

faithless spouse was anxious for his health and repose: the gates of the
palace

were shut, the arms removed, the attendants dismissed, and Rosamond, after
lull­

ing him to rest by her tender caresses, unbolted the chamber-door, and urged
the

reluctant conspirators to the instant execution of the deed. On the first
alarm,

the warrior started from his couch; his sword, which he attempted to draw, had

been fastened to the scabbard by the hand of Rosamond; and a small stool, his

only weapon, could not long protect him irom the spears of the assassins. The

daughter of Cuniraund smiled in his fall: his body was buried under the
staircase

of the palace, and the grateful posterity of the Lombards revered the tomb and

the memory of their victorious leader.

The ambitious Rosamond aspired to reign in the name of her lover; the city and

palace of Verona were awed by her power, and a faithful band of her native

Gepida: was prepared to applaud the revenge, and to second the wishes of their

sovereign. But the Lombard chiefs, who fled in the first moments of consterna­

tion and disorder, had resumed their courage and collected their powers; and
the

nation, instead of submitting to her reign, demanded with unanimous cries,
that

justice should be executed on the guilty spouse and the murderers of their
king.

She sought a refuge among the enemies of her country, and a criminal who de­

served the abhorrence of mankind was protected by the selfish policy of the
ex­

arch. With her daughter, the heiress of the Lombard throne, her two lovers,

her trusty Gepidse, and the spoils of the palace of Verona, Rosamond descended

the Adige, and the Po, and was transported by a Greek vessel to the safe
harbour

■of Ravenna. Longinus beheld with delight the charms and the treasures of the

(0 Tor the conniieit of Italy, see the original material, of Paul,(lib. ii. e.
7—10.12. 14. 25—27.) the elo­

quent narrative of Suramin, (torn. ii. de Regno Italise, lib. i. p. 15—19.)
and the correct and critical review or

Muraturi,(Annali d'ltaliai, torn. v. p. 164—1800

(2) The classical reader will recollect the wife and murder of Candanles, so
agreeably told in the first book

of Herodotus. The choice of Gyges, a*j)--iT»i «utoc jripiiiiw, may serve as
the excuse of Peredeus; and fine

soft insinuation of an odious Idea has been imitated by the best writers of
antiquity. (GrseTitu, afl Ciceron.'

Orat. pro Milone, e. 10.)

