OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 141

rights, the equal inheritance of mankind, are engrossed by the bold and
crafty;

each field and forest is circumscribed by the landmarks of a jealous master;
and

it is the peculiar praise of the Roman jurisprudence, that it asserts the
claim of

the first occupant to the wild animals of the earth, the air, and the waters.
In

the progress of primitive equity to final injustice, the steps are silent, the
shades

are almost imperceptible, and the absolute monopoly is guarded by positive
laws

and artificial reason. The active insatiate principle of self-love can only
supply

the arts of life and the wages of industry; and as soon as civil government
and

exclusive property have been introduced, they became necessary to the
existence

of the human race. Except in the singular institutions of Sparta, the wisest
le­

gislators have disapproved an Agrarian law as a false and dangerous
innovation.

Among the Romans, the enormous disproportion of wealth surmounted the ideal

restraints of a doubtful tradition, and an obsolete statute; a tradition that
the

poorest follower of Romulus had been endowed with a perpetual inheritance of

two jugera:(l) a statute which confined the richest citizen to the measure of
five

hundred jugera, or three hundred and twelve acres of land. The original
territory

t of Rome consisted only of some miles of wood and meadow along the banks of
the

Tiber; and domestic exchange could add nothing to the national stock. But the

goods of an alien or enemy were lawfully exposed to the first hostile
occupier; the

City was enriched by the profitable trade of war; and the blood of her sons
was

the only price that was paid for the Volscian sheep, the slaves of Britain, or
the

gems and gold of Asiatic kingdoms. In the language of ancient jurisprudence,

which was corrupted and forgotten before the age of Justinian, these spoils
were

distinguished by the name of manceps or mancifiium, taken with the hand; and

whenever they were sold or em.ancip.ated, the purchaser required some
assurance

that they had been the property of an enemy, and not of a fellow citizen. (2)
A

citizen could only forfeit his rights by apparent dereliction, and such
dereliction of

-a valuable interest could not easily be presumed. Yet, according to the twelve ta­  
bles, a prescription of one year for moveables, and of two years for
immoveables,

abolished the claim of the ancient master, if the actual possessor had
acquired

them by a fair transaction from the person whom he believed to be the lawful
pro­

prietor.^) Such conscientious injustice, without any mixture of fraud or
force,

could seldom injure the members of a small republic: but the various periods
of

three, of ten, or of twenty years, determined by Justinian, are more suitable
to the

latitude of a great empire. It is only in the term of prescription that the
distinc­

tion of real and personal fortune has been remarked by the civilians, and
their ge­

neral idea of property is that of simple, uniform, and absolute dominion. The
su­

bordinate exceptions of use, of usufruct,{4) of servitudes,^} imposed for the
bene­

fit of a neighbour on lands and houses, are abundantly explained by the
professors of

jurisprudence. The claims of property, as far as they are altired, by the
mixture,

the division, or the transformation of substances, are investigated with
metaphy­

sical subtlety by the same civilians.

The personal title of the first proprietor must be determined by his death:
but

the possession, without any appearance of change, is peaceably continued in
his

children, the associates of his toil and the partners of his wealth. This
natural

inheritance has been protected by the legislators of every climate and age,
and the

father is encouraged to persevere in slow and distant improvements, by the
tender

hope, that a long posterity will enjoy the fruits of his labour. The principle
of

hereditary succession is universal, but the order has been variously-
established by

convenience or caprice, by the spirit of national institutions, or by some
partial

example, which was originally decided by fraud or violence. The jurisprudence

of the Romans appears to have deviated from the equality of nature, much less

(1) The heredinra of the first Romaiu is defined by Varro, (de Re Rustics,
lib. i. c. 2. p. 141- *• 10. p. 160,

161. edit. Getner.) and clouded by Pliny's declamation. (Hist. Natur. 18. S.)
A just and learned comment is

given in the administration des Terres chez les Romaics, (p. 12—66.)

(2) The res mancipe is explained from faint and remote lights by Utpian
(Fragment, tit. xviii. p. 618,610.)

and Bynkershoek. (Opp. torn. i. p. 306—315.) The definition is somewhat
arbitrary: and as none except my­

self have assigned a reason, I am diffident of my own.

(3) From this short prescription, Hume, (Essays, vol. i. p. 423.) infers that
there could not then be more or­

der and settlement in Italy than now amongst the Tartars. By the civilian of
his adversary Wallace, he Is re­

proached, and not withou t reason, for overlooking the conditions.
(Institute], lib. ii. tit. vi.)

(4) See the Institutes, lib. i. tit. 4,5.) and the Fandeets. (lib. viL) Noodt
has composed a learned and dis­

tinct treatise de Usufructu. (Opp. torn. i. p. 387—478.)

(5) The questions de Servitutibus are discussed in the Institutes, (lib. ii.
tit. iii.) and Pandects, (lib. viii.) Ci­

cero, (pro Moreno, c. 9.)and Lactantius, (Institut. Divin. lib. i.e. 1.)
affect to laugh at the insignificant doc­

trine, de aqua pluvia arcenda, Vet it mit-ht he of frequent use among
litigious neigh tours, troth in town

stnd.-cotintrv.

