28 THE DECLINE AND FALL

that peninsula to Trebizond the eastern curve of the Euxine was secured by
forts,

by alliance, or by religion: and the possession of the Lazka, the Colchos of
an­

cient, the Mingrelia of modern, geography, soon became the object of an
import­

ant war. Trebizond, in after times the seat of a romantic empire, was indebted

to the liberality of Justinian for a church, an aqueduct, and a castle, whose
ditches

are hewn in the solid rock. From that maritime city, a frontier line of five
hun­

dred miles may be drawn to the fortress of Circesium, the last Human station
on

the Euphrates.(l) Above Trebizond immediately, and five days'journey to the

south, the country arises into dark forests and craggy mountains, as savage,
though

not so lofty, as the Alps and the Pyrenees. In this rigorous climate,(2) where
the

snows seldom melt, the fruits are tardy and tasteless; even honey is
poisonous; the

'most industrious tillage would be confined to some pleasant valleys; and the
pastoral

' tribes obtained a scanty sustenance from the flesh and milk of their cattle.
The

Chalybians(3) derived their name and temper from the iron quality of the soil;

and, since the days of Cyrus, they might produce, under the various
appellations of

Chaldeans, and Zanians, an uninten-upted prescription of war and rapine. Under

the reign of Justinian, they acknowledged the God and the emperor of the
Romans,

and seven fortresses were built in the most accessible passes, to exclude the
am­

bition of the Persian monarch. (4) The principal source of the Euphrates
descends

from the Chalybian mountains, and seems to flow towards the west and the Eux­

ine; bending to the south-west, the river passes under the walls of Satala and
Me-

litene (which were restored by Justinian as the bulwarks of the Lesser
Armenia,)

and gradually approaches the Mediterranean sea; till at length repelled by
mount

Taurus,(5) the Euphrates inclines his long and flexible course to the south-
east and

the gulf of Persia. Among the Roman cities beyond the Euphrates, we
distinguish

two recent foundations, which were named from Theodosius, and the relics of
the

martyrs, and two capitals, Amida and Edessa, which are celebrated in the
histo-

rv of every age. Their strength was proportioned, by Justinian, to the danger
of

their situation. A ditch and palisade might be sufficient to resist the
artless force

of the cavalry of Scythia; but more elaborate works were required to sustain a
re­

gular siege against the arms and treasures of the great king. His skilful
engineers

understood the methods of conducting deep mines, and of raising platforms to
the

level of the rampart; he shook the strongest battlements with his military
engines,

and sometimes advanced to the assault with aline of moveable turrets on the
backs

of elephants. In the great cities of the east, the disadvantage of space,
perhaps of

position, was compensated by the zeal of the people, who seconded the garrison

in the defence of their country and religion; and the fabulous promise of the
son of

God, that Edessa should never be taken, filled the citizens with violent
confidence,

and chilled the besiegers with doubt and dismay. (6) The subordinate towns of

Armenia and Mesopotamia were diligently strengthened, and the posts which ap­

peared to have any command of ground or water, were occupied by numerous

forts, substantially built of stone, or more hastily erected with the obvious
materi­

als of earth and brick. The eye of Justinian investigated every spot; and his
cru­

el precautions might attract the war into some lonely vale, whose peaceful
natives,

connected by trade and marriage, were ignorant of national discord and the
quar­

rels of princes. Westward of the Euphrates, a sandy desert extends above six

hundred miles to the Red Sea. Nature had interposed a vacant solitude between

the ambition of the two rival empires: the Arabians, till Mahomet arose, were
for-

(1) For the geography and architecture of this Armenian border, lee the
Persian Wan and Edifices (lih. ii.

c. 4—7. lib. iii. c.S—7.) of Procopius.

(2) The country is described by Totirnefort (Voyage an Levant, torn. iii.
lettre 17,18.) That skilful botanist

soon discovered the plant that infects the honey (Plin. xxi. 44.45.) He
observes, that the soldiers of Lnculhrs

might indeed be astonished at the cold, since, even in the plain of Erzerum,
snow sometimes falls in June,

and the harvest is seldom finished before September. The hills of Armenia are
below the fortieth degree of

latitude; but in the mountainous country which I inhabit, it is well known
that an ascent of some hours car­

ries the traveller from the climate of Langnedoc to that of Norway, and a
general theory has been introduced,

that under the line, an elevation of two thousand four hundred loitet is
equivalent to the cold of the polar cir­

cle fRomond, Observations sur les Voyages de Cose dans la Suisse, torn. h. p.
104.)

(3) The identity or proximity of the Chalybians, or Chaldeans, may be
investigated in Straho (lib. xii. p.

P26.0 Cellarins (Geograph. Antiq. torn. ii. p. 202—204.,) and Freret (Mem. de
I'Academie, torn. iv. p. 394.)—

Xenophon supposes, in his romance (Cyropjed. lib. iii.,) the same barbarians
against whom he had fought in

his retreat (Anabasis, lib. iv.)

(4) Procopius, Persic, lib. i. c. 15. De Edifio. lib. iii. c. 6.

(5) Ni Taurus obstet in nostra maria venturus (Pomponius Mela, iii. 8.) Pliny,
a poet as well as a naturalist

(v. 20..) personifies the river and mountain, and describes their combat. See
the course of the Tigris atid Eu­

phrates, in the excellent treatise of d'Anville.

(6) Procopius (Persic, lib. ii. c. 12.) tells the story with the tone half
sceptical, half superstitious, of Herodo­

tus* The promise was not in the primitive lie of Eusebius, but dates at least
from the year 400; and a third lie,

the Verornca, was soon raised on the two former (Evagrius, lib. iv. c. 27.) As
Edessa hai been taken, Tille-

rnont mutt disclaim the promise (Mem. Ecclcs. torn. i. p. 362.383.617.)

