OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 2.1

Wevy knee was bent, and attempted to sow the seeds of discord between the em­

peror and his beloved consort. Even Theodora herself was constrained to dis­

semble, to wait a favourable moment, and, by an artful conspiracy, to render
John

of Cappadocia the accomplice of his own destruction. At a time when Belisa-

rius, unless he had been a hero, must have shown himself a rebel, his wife
Anto-

nina, who enjoyed the secret confidence of the empress, communicated his
feigned

discontent to Euphemia, the daughter of the prefect; the credulous virgin im­

parted to her father the dangerous project, and John, who might have known the

value of oaths and promises, was tempted to accept a nocturnal, and almost
trea­

sonable interview with the wife of Belisarius. An ambuscade of guards and eu­

nuchs had been posted by the command of Theodora: they rushed with drawn

swords to seize or punish the guilty minister: he was saved by the fidelity of
his

attendants; but, instead of appealing to a gracious sovereign, who had
privately

warned him of his danger, he pusillanimously fled to the sanctuary of the
church.

The favourite of Justinian was sacrificed to conjugal tenderness or domestic
tran­

quillity; the conversion of a prefect into a priest extinguished his ambitious
hopes,

but the friendship of the emperor alleviated his disgrace, and he retained, in
the

mild exile of Cyzicus, an ample portion of his riches. Such imperfect revenge

could not satisfy the unrelenting hatred of Theodora; the murder of his old
ene­

my, the bishop of Cyzicus, afforded a decent pretence; and John of Cappadocia,

whose actions had deserved a thousand deaths, was at last condemned for a
crime

of which he was innocent. A great minister, who had been invested with the ho­

nours of consul and patrician, was ignominiously scourged like the vilest of
male­

factors: a tattered cloak was the sole remnant of his fortunes; he was
transported

in a bark to the place of his banishment at Antinopolis in Upper Egypt, and
the

prefect of the east begged his bread through the cities which had trembled at
his

name. During an exile of seven years, his life was protected and threatened by

the ingenious cruelty of Theodora; and when her death permitted the emperor to

recall a servant, whom he had abandoned with regret, the ambition of John of

Cappadocia was reduced to the humble duties of the sacerdotal profession. His

successors convinced the subjects of Justinian, that the arts of oppression
might

still be improved by experience and industry; the frauds of a Syrian banker
were

introduced into the administration of the finances; and the example of the
prefect

was diligently copied by the questor, the public and private treasurer, the
go­

vernors of provinces, and the principal magistrates of the eastern empire. (1)

V. The edifices of Justinian were cemented with the blood and treasure of his

people; but those stately structures appeared to announce the prosperity of
the

empire, and actually displayed the skill of their architects. Both the theoiy
and

practice of the arts which depend on mathematical science and mechanical
power,

were cultivated under the patronage of the emperors; the fame of Archimedes
was

rivalled by Proclus and Anthemius; and if their miracles had been related by
in­

telligent spectators, they might now enlarge the speculations, instead of
exciting

the distrust of philosophers. A tradition has prevailed, that the Roman fleet
was

reduced to ashes in the port of Syracuse by the burning-glasses of
Archimedes;(2)

and it is asserted, that a similar expedient was employed by Proclus to
destroy

the Gothic vessels in the harbour of Constantinople, and to protect his
benefactor

Anastasius against the bold enterprise of Vitalian.(3) A machine was fixed on

the walls of the city, consisting of a hexagon mirror of polished brass, with
many

smaller and moveable polygons to receive and reflect the rays of the meridian

sun; and a consuming flame was darted to the distance, perhaps, of two hundred

feet.(4) The truth of these two extraordinary facts is invalidated'by the
silence

of the most authentic historians; and the use of burning-glasses was never
adopt­

ed in the attack or defence of'places.(5) Yet the admirable experiments of a

(1) The chronology of Procopius is loose and obscure; bur. with the aid of
Pagi. I can discern that John was

appointed pretorian prefect of the east in the year 530; that he was removed
in January 532—restored before

'June 533—banished in 541—and recalled between June, 548, and April 1, 549.
Ateman. p. 96, 97.) gives the

list of his ten successors—a rapid series in a single r( ign.

(2) This conflagration is hinted by Lucian, (in Hippia, c. 2.) and Galen,
(lib. iii. de lemperamentis. torn. i.

p. 81. edit. Bazil.) in the second century. A thousand years afterwards, it is
positively affirmed by Zonaras,

(lib. ix. p. 424.) on the filth of Dion Cassius, by Tzetzess, (Chiliad, ii.
119, fke.) EusUthlut, (ad Iliad. E. p.

338.) and the scholiast of Lucian. See Fabricius, (Bibliot. Graec. lib. iii.
c. 22. torn. ii. p. 551,552.) to whom I

am more or less indebted for several of these quotations.

(3) Zonaras (lib. xiv. p. 55.) affirms the fact, without quoting any evidence.

(4) Tzetzes describes he artifice of these burning glasses, which he had read,
perhaps with no learned eyes

in a mathematical treatise of Anthemius. That treatise, mpt
s-xpzScPyj^ii^avitfMeTooy, has been lately published,

translated, and illustrated, by M. Dupuys, a scholar, and a mathematician.
(Memoirs de 1'Acadcime des In­

scriptions, ton), sxti. p. 392—451.)

(5) In the siege of Syracuse, by the silence of Polybiui, Plutarch, Livyj in
the siege of Constantinople, by

that of Marcellinus, and all the cotemporaries of the sixth century.

