OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 361

by the report of the mighty concourse of Jews and Christians, Greeks and Arme­

nians, of natives of Syria and of strangers of Egypt, to the number of ten
thou­

sand, besides a guard of five thousand horse that attended the person of the
bride.

The Saracens paused. " For my own part," said Abdallah, "I dare not go back-

our toss are many, our dangers are great, but our reward is splendid and
secure'

either in this life or in the life to come. Let every man, according to his
inclina­

tion, advance or retire." Not a Mussulman deserted his standard. "Lead the

way," said Abdallah to his Christian guide, "and you shall see what the compa-

nions of the prophet can perform." They charged in five squadrons; but after

the first advantage of the surprise, they were encompassed and almost over­

whelmed by the multitude of their enemies; and their valiant band is
fancifully

compared to a white spot in the skin of a black camel. (1) About the hour of
sun­

set, when their weapons dropped from their hands, when they panted on the
verge

of eternity, they discovered an approaching cloud of dust; they heard the
welcome

sound of the iecbir,(2) and they soon perceived the standard of Calcd, who
flew

to their relief with the utmost speed of his cavalry. The Christians were
broken

by his attack, and slaughtered in their flight, as far as the river of
Tripoli. They

left behind them the various riches of the fair; the merchandises that were
ex­

posed for sale, the money that was brought for purchase, the gay decorations
of

the nuptials, and the governor's daughter, with forty of her female
attendants.

The fruits, provisions, and furniture, the money, plate and jewels, were
diligentlv

laden on the backs of horses, asses, and mules; and the holy robbers returned
in

triumph to Damascus. The hermit, after a short and angry controversy with Ca-

led, declined the crown of martyrdom, and was left alive in the solitary scene
of

blood and devastation.

Syria,(3) one of the countries that have been improved by the most early
culti­

vation, is not unworthy of the preference. (4) The neat of the climate is
tempered

by the vicinity of the sea and mountains, by the plenty of wood and water; and

the produce of a fertile soil affords the subsistence, and encourages the
propaga­

tion, of men and animals. From the age of David to that of Heraclius, the
coun­

try was overspread with ancient and flourishing cities: the inhabitants were
nu­

merous and wealthy; and, after the slow ravage of despotism and superstition,
af­

ter the recent calamities of the Persian war, Syria could still attract and
reward

the rapacious tribes of the desert. A plain, of ten days'journey from Damascus

to AUeppo and. Antioch, is watered, on the western side, by the winding course
of

the Orontes. The hills of Libanus and Anti-Lihanus are planted from north to

south, between the Orontes and the Mediterranean, and the epithet of hollow
(Ccs-

lesyria) was applied to a long and fruitful valley, which is confined in the
same di­

rection by the two ridges of snowy mountains. (5) Among the cities, which are

enumerated by Greek and oriental names in the geography and conquest of Syria,

we may distinguish Emesa or Hems, Heliopolis or Baalbec, the former as the me­

tropolis of the plain, the latter as the capital of the valley. Under the last
of the

Cicsars, they were strong and populous: the turrets glittered from afar; an
ample

space was covered with public and private buildings; and the citizens were
illus­

trious by their spirit, or at least by their pride, by their riches, or at
least by their

(1) I am bolder than Mr. Oekley, (vol. i. p. 164.) who dares not insert this
figurative expression in the text,

though he observes in a marginal'note, tlmt the Arabians often borrow their
similes from that useful and fami­

liar animal. The rein-deer may be equally famous in the tongs of the
Laplanders.

(2) We heard the tecbir; so the Arabs call

Their shout of onset, when with loud appeal

They challenge heaven, as if demanding conquest.

This word, so formidable in their holy wars, is a verb activa (says Oekley in
his index) of the second conjuga­

tion, from Kabbara, which signifies saying Alia Achar, God is most mighty!

(3) In the geography of Abulfeda, the description of Syria, his native
country, is the most interesting and

authentic portion. It was published in Arabic and Latin, Lipsiae, 1706, in
quarto, with the learned notes of

Kochler and Reiske, and some extracts of geography and natural history from
the Ibu Ol Wardii. Among the

modern travels, Poeock's description of the east (of Syria and Mesopotamia,
vol. ii. p. 88—209.) is a work of su­

perior learning and dignity; bnt the author too confounds what he had, seen
and what he had read.

(4) The praises of Dionysins are just and lively. Kk» th f*sv (Syria) mhkot n
x*t o\3ioi ixflwriv, (in Pe-

riegesi. v. 903. in torn. iv. Geograph. Minor. Hudson.) In another place he
styles the eountry paa.ux-roXiv *wv

(v. 898.) He proceeds to say,

YlxVX $E T01 A.i:TMpt] TS %»t !l)30T3? tVTKlTQ %»t»1

Mi)A.« ti Qip3tiuv*t x%( dtvSpstrt KKp^ov aigiir. r. 921,922.

This poetical geographer lived in the age of Augustus, and his description of
the world is illustrated by the

Greek commentary of Eustathius, who paid the same compliment to Homer and
Dionysius. (Fabric. Bibliot.

Grsec. lib. iv. c. 2. torn. iii. p. 21, &c.

(5) The tonography of the Libanus and Anti-Libanus, is excellently described
by the reaming and sense of

Jltland.i (Palestin. torn. i. p. 311—320.)

Vol. ill 46

