OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

ages of the Jacobite church; but the order of the hierarchy is relaxed or dis­

solved, and the greater part of their diocesses is confined to the
neighbourhood of

the Euphrates and the Tigris. The cities of Aleppo and Amida, which arc often

visited Dy the patriarch, contain some wealthy merchants and industrious
mecha­

nics, but the multitude derive their scanty sustenance from their daily
labour: and

poverty, as well as superstition, may impose their excessive fasts,—five
annual

lents, during which both the clergy and laity abstain not only from flesh or
eggs,

but even from the taste of wine, of oil, and of fish. Their present numbers
are

esteemed from fifty to fourscore thousand souls, the remnant of a populous
church,

which has gradually decreased under the oppression of twelve centuries. Yet in

that long period, some strangers of merit have been converted to the
Monophysite

faith, and a Jew was the father of Abulpharagius,(l) primate of the east, so
truly

eminent both in his life and death. In his life he was an elegant writer of
the Sy-

riac and Arabic tongues, a poet, physician, and historian, a subtle
philosopher, and

a moderate divine. In his death, his funeral was attended by hii rival the
Nesto-

rian patriarch, with a train of Greeks and Armenians, who forgot their
disputes,

and mingled their tears over the grave of an enemy. The seel which was ho­

noured by the virtues of Abulpharagius, appears, however, to sink below the
le­

vel of their Nestorian brethren. The superstition of the Jacobites is more
abject,

their fasts more rigid, (2) their intestine divisions are more numerous, and
their doc­

tors, (as far as I can measure the degrees of nonsense) are more remote from
the

precincts of reason. Something may possibly be allowed for the rigour of the
Mono­

physite theology;(3) much more for the superior influence of the monastic
order,

in Syria, in Egypt, in Ethiopia, the Jacobite monks have ever been
distinguished

by the austerity of their penance and the absurdity of their legends. Alive or

dead they are worshipped as the favourites of the Deity; the crosier of bishop

and patriarch is reserved for their venerable hands; and they assume the
govern­

ment of men, while they are yet reeking with the habits and prejudices of the

cloister.

III. In the style of the oriental Christians, the Monothelites of every age
are

described under the appellation of Maronites,(4) a name which has been
insensi­

bly transferred from a hermit to a monastery, from a monastery to a nation.
Ma-

ron, a saint or savage of the fifth century, displayed his religious madness
in Sy­

ria; the rival cities of Apamea and Emesa, disputed his relics, a stately
church

was erected on his tomb, and six hundred of his disciples united their
solitary cells

on the banks of the Orontes. On the controversies of the incarnation, they
nicely

threaded the orthodox line between the sects of Nestorius and Eutyches: but
the

unfortunate question of one will or operation in the two natures of Christ was
ge­

nerated by their curious leisure. Their proselyte, the emperor Heraclius, was

rejected as a Maronite from the walls of Emesa: he found a refuge in the
monas­

tery of his brethren; and their theological lessons were repaid with the gift
of a

spacious and wealthy domain. The name and doctrine of this venerable school

were propagated among the Greeks and Syrians, and their zeal is expressed by

Macarius, patriarch of Antioch, who declared before the synod of
Constantinople,

that sooner than subscribe the two wills of Christ, he would submit to be hewn

piecemeal, and cast into the sea.(5) A similar or a less cruel mode of
persecution

soon converted the unresisting subjects of the plain, while the glorious title
of

Mardaites,{6) or rebel, was bravely maintained by the hardy natives of mount

(1) The aeeount of hit person and writings is perhaps the most curious article
in the Bihliotheca of Asseman-

nns.(tom. it. p. 244—321. under the name of Gregorius Bar-Hebratus.) La Craze
(Christianisme d'Ethiope, p.

53—63.) ridicules the prejudice of the Spaniards against the Jewish blood,
which secretly defiles their church

aad state.

(3) This excessive abstinence is censured by La Croze, (p. 353.) and even by
the Syrian Astemaonus, (tots* i.

p. 226. torn. ii. p. 364, 305.)

(3) The state of the Monophysites is excellently illustrated in a dissertation
at the beginning of the second

volume of Assemannus, which contains one hundred and foity-two pages. The
Syriac Chronicle of Gregory

Bar-Hebrseus, or Abulpharagius, (Bibliot. Orient, lorn, ii. p. 321—463.)
pursues the double series of the Nes­

torian catholics and the maphrians of the Jacobites. »

(4) The synonymous use of the two words may be proved from Eutychins, (Annal.
torn. ii. p. 491. 207.332.)

and many similar passages which may be found in the methodical table of
Pocoek. He was not actuated by

any prejudice against the Maronites of the tenth century; and we may believe a
Melchite, whose testimony u

confirmed by the Jacobins and Latins.

_ (5) Coneil. torn. vii. p. 780. The Monothelite cause was supported with
firmness and subtlety by Constan-

tine, a Syrian priest of Apamea (p. 1040, &c.)

(6) Theophanes (Chron. p. 295,296.300.302.306.) and Cedrenus (p. 437.440.)
relates the exploits of the Mar-

daites: the name (Mard. in Syriac rebellavit) is explained by La Roque, Voyage
de la Syrie, torn. ii. p. 53.) the

dates are fixed byPagi,(A. D. 676. No. 4—14. A. 0.685. No. 3,4.) and even the
obscure story of the patriarch

John Maron (Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn, i.p.496—520.) illustrates from the
year 6S6 tp 707. the troubles cf

Mount Lihanos.

