OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 43

subdued Sardinia, we have lost Africa. No sooner did Belisarius appear with a

handful of soldiers, than courage and prosperity deserted the cause of the
Vandals.

Your nephew Gibamund, your brother Ammatas, have been betrayed to death by

the cowardice of their followers. Our horses, our ships, Carthage itself, and
all

Africa, are in the power of the enemy. Yet the Vandals still prefer an
ignomini­

ous repose at the expense of their wives and children, their wealth and
liberty.

Nothing now remains, except the field of Bulla, and the hope of your valour.—

Abandon Sardinia; fly to our relief; restore our empire, or perish by our
side." On

the receipt of this epistle, Zano imparted his grief to the principal Vandals;
but

the intelligence was prudently concealed from the natives of the island. The

troops embarked in one hundred and twenty galleys at the port of Cagliari,
cast

anchor the third day on the confines of Mauritania, and hastily pursued their
march

to join the royal standard in the camp of Bulla. Mournful was the interview:
the

two brothers embraced; they wept in silence; no questions were asked of the
Sar­

dinian victory; no inquiries were made of the African misfortunes: they saw
before

their eyes the whole extent of their calamities; and the absence of their
wives and

children afforded a melancholy proof, that either death or captivity had been
their '

lot. The languid spirit of the Vandals was at length awakened and united by
the

entreaties of their king, the example of Zano, and the instant danger which
threat­

ened their monarchy and religion. The military strength of the nation advanced

to battle"; and such was the rapid increase, that, before their army reached
Trica-

meron, about twenty miles from Carthage, they might boast, perhaps with some

exaggeration, that they surpassed, in a tenfold proportion, the diminutive
powers

of the Romans. But these powers were under the command of Belisarius: and, as

he was conscious of their superior merit, he permitted the barbarians to
surprise

him at an unseasonable hour. The Romans were instantly under arms: a rivulet

covered their front; the cavalry formed the first line, which Belisarius
supported

in the centre, at the head of five hundred guards; the infantry, at some
distance,

was posted in the second line; and the vigilance of the general watched the
sepa- *

rate station and ambiguous faith of the Massagetx, who secretly reserved their
aid

For the conquerors. The historian has inserted, and the reader may easily
supply

the speeches(l) of the commanders, who, by arguments the most apposite to
their

situation, inculcated the importance of victory, and the contempt of life.
Zano,

with the troops which had followed him to the conquest of Sardinia, was placed
in

the centre; and the throne of Genseric might have stood, if the multitude of
Van­

dals had imitated their intrepid resolution. Casting away their lances and
missile

weapons, they drew their swords, and expected the charge: the Roman cavalry

thrice passed the rivulet; they were thrice repulsed; and the conflict was
firmly

maintained till Zano fell, and the standard of Belisarius was displayed.
Gelimer

retreated to his camp; the Huns joined the pursuit; and the victors despoiled
the

bodies of the slain. Yet no more than fifty Romans, and eight hundred Vandals,

were found on the field of battle; so inconsiderable was the carnage of a day,
which

extinguished a nation, and transferred the empire of Africa. In the evening,
Be­

lisarius led his infantry to the attack of the camp; and the pusillanimous
flight of

Gelimer exposed the vanity of his recent declarations, that, to the
vanquished,

death was a relief, like a burden, and infamy the only object of terror. His
depar­

ture was secret; but as soon as the Vandals discovered that their king had
deserted

them, they hastily dispersed, anxious only for their personal safety, and
careless

of every object that is dear or valuable to mankind. The Romans entered the

camp without resistance: and the wildest scenes of disorder were veiled in the

"darkness and confusion of the night. Every barbarian who met their swords was

inhumanly massacred; their widows and daughters, as rich heirs, or beautiful
con­

cubines, were embraced by the licentious soldiers; and avarice itself was
almost

satiated with the treasures of gold and silver, the accumulated fruits of
conquest

or economy in a long period of prosperity and peace. In this frantic search,
the

troops, even of Belisarius, forgot their caution and respect. Intoxicated with
lust

and rapine, they explored in small parties, or alone, the adjacent fields, the
woods,

the rocks, and the caverns, that might might possibly conceal any desirable
prize:

laden with booty, they deserted their ranks, and wandered, without a guide, on

the high road to Carthage; and if the flying enemies had dared to return, very
few

of the conquerors would have escaped. Deeply sensible of the disgrace and dan-

O) These orations always express the sense of the times, and sometimes of the
actors. 4 have condensed

"that sense, and thrown away declamation.

