THE DECLINE AND FALL

tribes;(l) who, according to the vicissitudes of fortune, had obeyed or
disregarded

the eloquence or the arms of the prophet. Indifference for rites and opinions
still

marks the character of the Bedoweens; and they might accept, as loosely as
they

hold the doctrine of the Koran. Yet an obstinate remnant still adhered tp the
re­

ligion and liberty of their ancestors; and the war of Honain derived a proper
ap­

pellation from the idols, whom Mahomet had vowed to destroy, and whom the con­

federates of Tayef had sworn to defend. (2) Four thousand pagans advanced

with secrecy and speed to surprise the conqueror; they pitied and despised the
su­

pine negligence of the Koreish, but they depended on the wishes, and perhaps
the

aid, of a people who had so lately renounced their gods, and bowed beneath the

yoke of their enemy. The banners of Medina and Mecca were displayed by the

prophet; a crowd of Bedoweens increased the strength or numbers of the army,

and twelve thousand Mussulmans entertained a rash and sinful presumption of

their invincible strength. They descended without precaution into the valley
of

Honain; the heights had been occupied by the archers and slingers of the
confede­

rates; their numbers were oppressed, their discipline was confounded, their
cou­

rage was appalled, and the Koreish smiled at their impending destruction. The

prophet, on his white mule, was encompassed by the enemies; he attempted to

rush against their spears in search of a glorious death: ten of his faithful
compa­

nions interposed their weapons and their breasts; three of these fell dead at
his

feet. "O my brethren," he repeatedly cried with sorrow and indignation, "I

am the son of Abdallah, I am the apostle of truth! O man, stand fast jn the
faith!

O God, send down thy succour!" His uncle Abbas, who like the heroes of Ho­

mer, excelled in the loudness of his voice, made the valley resound with the
re­

cital of the gifts and promises of God: the flying Moslems returned from all
sides

to the holy standard; and Mahomet observed with pleasure, that the furnace was

again rekindled: his conduct and example restored the battle; and he animated
his

victorious troops to inflict a merciless revenge on the authors of their
shame.

From the field of Honain, he marched without delay to the siege of Tayef,
sixty

miles to the south-east of Mecca, a fortress of strength, whose fertile lands
pro­

duce the fruits of Syria in the midst of the Arabian desert. A friendly tribe,
in­

structed (I know not how) in the art of sieges, supplied him with a train of
bat­

tering rams and military engines, with a body of five hundred artificers. But
it

was in vain that he offered freedom to the slaves of Tayef; that he violated
his

own laws by the extirpation of the fruit trees: that the ground was opened by
the

miners; that the breach was assaulted by the troops. After a siege of twenty

days, the prophet sounded a retreat; but he retreated with a song of devout
tri­

umph, and affected to pray for the repentance of the unbelieving city. The
spoil

of this fortunate expedition amounted to six thousand captives, twenty-four
thou­

sand camels, forty thousand sheep, and four thousand ounces of silver: a tribe
who

had fought at Honain, redeemed their prisoners by the sacrifice of their
idols; but

Mahomet compensated the loss, by resigning to the soldiers his fifth of the
plun­

der, and wished, for their sake, that he possessed as many head of cattle as
there

were trees in the province of Tehama. Instead of chastising the disaffection
of

the Koreish, he endeavoured to cut out their tongues, (his own expression,)
and to

secure their attachment by a superior measure of liberality: Abu Sophian alone

was presented with three hundred camels and twenty ounces of silver; and Mecca

was sincerely converted to the profitable religion of the Koran.

The fugitives and auxiliaries complained, that they who had borne the burden

were neglected in the season of victory. " Alas," replied their ai-tful
leader,

" suffer me to conciliate these recent enemies, these doubtful proselytes, by
the

gift of some perishable goods. To your guard I intrust my life and fortunes.
You

are the companions of my exile, of my kingdom, of my paradise." He was fol­

lowed by the deputies of Tayef, who dreaded the repetition of a siege. " Grant

ns, O apostle of God, a truce of three years, with the toleration of our
ancient

worship."—"Not a month, not an hour."—"Excuse us at least from the obliga­

tion of prayer."—" Without prayer religion is of no avail." They submitted in

silence; their temples were demolished, and the same sentence of destruction
was

executed on all the idols of Arabia. His lieutenants, on the shores of the Red

(1) Abulfeda, p. 112—115. Gagnier, torn. iii. p. 67—88. D'Herbelot, Mohammed.

...(») The siege of Tayef, dirision of the spoil, &e. are related by Abulfeda
(p. 117—123.) and Gagnier, (torn.

VI"J?" 88—111.) It is Al Jannabi who mentions the engines and engineers of the
tribe of Daws. The fertile spot

■oi Tayef was supposed to be a piece of the land of Syria detached and dropped
in the general deluge.

