THE DECLINE AND FALL

ble. From a motive of private revenge, they enabled their most dangerous enemy

to destroy their most valuable ally. A sister of the great Theodoric had been

given in marriage to Thrasimond, the African king;(l) on this occasion, the
for­

tress of Lilyb3eum(2) in Sicily was resigned to the Vandals: and the princess
Am-

alafrida was attended by a martial train of one thousand nobles, and five
thousand

Gothic soldiers, who signalized their valour in the Moorish wars. Their merit

was overrated by themselves, and perhaps neglected by the Vandals: they viewed

" - the country with envy, and the conquerors with disdain; but their real or
fictitious

conspiracy was prevented by a massacre; the Goths were oppressed, and the cap­

tivity of Amalafrida was 60on followed by her secret and suspicious death. The

eloquent pen of Cassrodorus was employed to reproach the Vandal court with the

cruel violation of every social and public duty; but the vengeance which he
threat­

ened, in the name of his sovereign, might be derided with impunity, as long as

Africa was protected by the sea, and the Goths were destitute of a navy. In
the

blind impotence of grief and indignation, they joyfully saluted the approach
of the

Romans, entertained the fleet of Belisarius in the ports of Sicily, and were
speedi­

ly delighted or alarmed by the surprising intelligence, that their revenge was
ex­

ecuted beyond the measure of their hopes, or perhaps of their wishes. To their

friendship the emperor was indebted for the kingdom of Africa, and the Goths

might reasonably think, that they were entitled to resume the possession of a
bar­

ren rock, so recently separated as a nuptial gift from the island of Sicily.
They

Were soon undeceived by the haughty mandate of Belisarius, which excited their

tardy and unavailing repentance. "The city and promontory of Lilybseum,"

said the Roman general, '" belonged to the Vandals, and I claim them by the

right of conquest. Your submission may deserve the favour of the, emperor;

your obstinacy will provoke his displeasure, and must kindle a war, that can

terminate only in your utter ruin. If you compel us to take up arms we shall

contend, not to regain the possession of a single city, but to deprive you of

all the provinces which you unjustly withhold from their lawful sovereign." A

nation of two hundred thousand soldiers might have smiled at the vain .me­

nace of Justinian and his lieutenant: but a spirit of discord and disaffection
pre­

vailed in Italy, and the Goths supported) with reluctance, the indignity of a
fe­

male reign. (3)

The birth of Amalasontha, the regent and queen of Italy, (4) united the two

most illustrious families of the barbarians. Her mother, the sister of Clovis,
was

descended from the long-haired kings of the Merovingian race;(4) and the regal

succession of the Amali was illustrated in the eleventh generation, by her
father,

the great Theodoric, whose merit might have ennobled a plebeian origin. The

sex of his daughter excluded her from the Gothic throne; but his vigilant
tender­

ness for his family and his people discovered the last heir of the royal line,
whose

ancestors had taken refuge in Spain; and the fortunate Eutharic was suddenly
ex­

alted to the rank of a consul and a prince. He enjoyed only a short time the

charms of Amalasontha, and the hopes of a succession; and his widow, after the

death of her husband and father, was left the guardian of her son Athalaric,
and

the kingdom of Italy. At the age of about twenty-eight years, the endowments

of her mind and person had attained their perfect maturity. Her beauty, which,

in the apprehension of Theodora herself, might have disputed the conquest of
an

emperor, was animated by manly sense, activity, and resolution. Education and

experience had cultivated her talents; her philosophic studies were exempt
from

vanity} and, though she expressed herself with equal elegance and ease in the

Greek, the Latin, and the Gothic tongue, the daughter of Theodoric maintained

in her counsels a discreet and impenetrable silence. By a faithful imitation
of the

virtues, she revived the prosperity of his reign: while she strove, with pious
care,

to expiate the faults, and to obliterate the darker memory of his declining
age.

The children of Boethius and Symmachus were restored to their paternal inheri-

(1) See th'e marriage and fate of Amalafrida in Procopius, (Vandal, lib. i. c
8,9.) and in Cassiodorus, (Var.

ix. 1.) the expostulation of her royal brother. Compare likewise the Chronicle
of Victor Tunnunensis.

(2) Lilybseum was built by the Carthaginians, Olymp. 95. 4., and in the first
Punic war, a strong situation,

and excellent harbour, rentfered that place an important object to both
nations.

(3) Compare the different passages of Procopius (Vandal, lib. ii. c. 5.
Gothic, lib. i. c. 3.)

(4) ffpr the reign and character of Amalasontha, see Procopius (Gothic, lib.
i. c.2—4. and Anecdot. c. 16. with

the notes of Alemannus;) Cassiodorus, Var. 8—11. 1. and Jornandes (de Rebus
Geticis, c. 59. and De Succes-

sione Rcennrum, in Muratori, torn. i. p. 241.)

(5) Theknarrtage of Theodoric with Audefieda. the sister of CloTis, maybe
placed in the year 495, soon af­

ter the conquest of Italy (de Buat, Hist, des Peuples, torn. ix. p. 213.) The
nuptials of Eutharic and Amaja-

sontha were celebrated m(l5. (Cassiodor. in Chrun. p. 453.)

