36 J THE DECLINE AND FALL

luxury. In the days of paganism, both Emesa and Heliopolis were addicted to
the

worship of Baal, or the sun; but the decline of their superstition and
splendour

has been marked by a singular variety of fortune. Not a vestige remains of the

temple of Emesa, which was equalled in poetic style to the summit of mount Li-

banus,(l) while the ruins of Baalbec, invisible to the writers of antiquity,
excite

the curiosity and wonder of the European traveller. (2) The measure of
the,tem-

ple is two hundred feet in length, and one hundred in breadth: the front is
adorned

with a double portico of eight columns; fourteen may be counted on either
side;

and each column, forty-five feet in height, is composed of three massy blocks
of

stone or marble. The proportions and ornaments of the Corinthian order express

the architecture of the Greeks; but as Baalbec has never been the seat of a
mo­

narch, we are at a loss to conceive how the expense of these magnificent
structures

could be supplied by private or municipal liberality.(3) From the conquest of

Damascus the Saracens proceeded to Heliopolis and Emesa: but 1 shall decline

the repetition of the sallies and combats which have been already shown on a
large

scale. In the prosecution of the war, their policy was not less effectual than
their

sword. By short and separate truces they dissolved the union of the enemy; ac­

customed the Syrians to compart their friendship with their enmity;
familiarized

the idea of their language, religion, and manners; and exhausted, by
clandestine

purchase, the magazines and arsenals of the cities which they returned to
besiege.

They aggravated the ransom of the more wealthy or the more obstinate; and
Chal-

cis alone was taxed at five thousand ounces of gold, five thousand ounces of
silver,

two thousand robes of silk, and as many figs and olives as would load five
thousand

asses. But the terms of truce or capitulation were faithfully observed; and
the

lieutenant of the caliph, who had promised not to enter the walls of the
captive

Baalbec, remained tranquil and immoveable in his tent till the jarring
factions so­

licited the interposition of a foreign master. The conquest of the plain and
val­

ley of Syria was achieved in less than two years. Yet the commander of the
faith­

ful reproved the slowness of their progress, and the Saracens, bewailing their
fault

with tears of rage and repentance, called aloud on their chiefs to lead them
forth

to fight the battles of the Lord. In a recent action, under the walls of
Emesa, an

Arabian youth, the cousin of Caled, was heard aloud to exclaim—" Methinks I
see

the black-eyed girls looking upon me; one of whom, should she appear in this
world,

all mankind would iVe for love of her. And I see in the hand of one of them, a

handkerchief of green silk, and a cap of precious stones, and she beckons me
and

calls out, Come hither quickly, for I love thee." With these words charging
the

Christians, he made havoc wherever he went, till observed at length by the
gover­

nor of Hems, he was struck through with a javelin.

It was incumbent on the Saracens to exert the full powers of their valour and

enthusiasm against the forces of the emperor, who was taught by repeated
losses,

that the rovers of the desert had undertaken, and would speedily achiete, a
regu­

lar and permanent conquest. From the provinces of Europe and Asia, fourscore

thousand soldiers were transported by sea and land to Antioch and Casarea: the

light troops of the army consisted of sixty thousand Christian Arabs of the
tribes

of Gassan. Under the banner of Jabalah, the last of their princes, thev
marched

in the van; and it was a maxim of the Greeks, that, for the purpose of cutting

diamond, a diamond was the most effectual. Heraclius withheld his person from

the dangers of the field; but his presumption, ov perhaps his despondency,
suggested

(1) ....: RmMie fastigia celsa rcnident

Nam diffusa solo latus explieat; ac subit auras

Turribus in cwlum mtentibus; incola Claris

Cor studiis aeilit . . . • •

Denique flamtnicoruo devoti pectora loli

Vitam agitant. Libanus frnndosa cacuniina turget

lilt tamer* his certant celsifastigia templi,

These verses of the Latin Tersion of Rtifus Avienus are wanting in the Greek
original of Dionysiw; and sine

tbey are likewise unnoticed by Eustathius, I must, with Fabncius (Ribliot.
Latin, torn. iii. p. 153. edit. Er.

nesti,) and ae^tnst Salmasius, (ad Vopiscum, p. 366, 367. in Hist. August.)
ascribe them to the fancy rather

than to the MSS.of Avienus.

(2) I aw much better satisfied with MaundreU's slight octavo (Journey, p.
134—139.) than with the pompous

folio of Dr Pocuck; (Description of the East, vol. ii. p. 106—113.) but every
preceding account is eclipsed by the

magnificent description and drawings of MM. Datvkius and Wood, who have
transported into England the

ruins of Palmyra and Baalbec.

(3) The orientals explain the prodifryby a never-failing expedient. The
edifices of Baalbec were constructed

by the fairies or the genii. (Hist de Timour Bee. torn. iii. lib. v. c. 23. p.
311,312. Voyage d'Otter. torn. i. p. 83.)

with less absurdity, but with equal ignorance, Abulfeda and Ibu Chaukel
ascribe them to the Sabaeaos o

Aaditet. Non sunt id omm Syria sedincia magnificcjitiora his. (Tabula Syrhe,
p. 103.

