18 THE DECLINE AND FALL

which constitute the national wealth. The public distress had been alleviated
by

the economy of Anastasius, and that prudent emperor accumulated an immense

treasure, while he delivered his people from the most odious or oppressive
taxes.

Their gratitude universally applauded the abolition of the g old of
affliction,, a per­

sonal tribute on the industry of the poor;(l) but more tolerable, as it should
seem,

in the form than in the substance, since the flourishing city of Edessa paid
only one

hundred and forty pounds of gold, which was collected in four years from ten
thou­

sand artificers. (2) Yet such was the parsimony, which supported this liberal
dis­

position, that, in a reign of twenty-seven years, Anastasius saved, from his
annual

revenue, the enormous sum of thirteen millions sterling, or three hundred and*

twenty thousand pounds of gold. (3) His example was neglected, and his
treasure

was abused, by the nephew of Justin. The riches of Justinian were speedily ex­

hausted by alms and buildings, by ambitious wars, and ignominious treaties.
His

revenues were found inadequate to his expenses. Every art was tried to extort

from the people the gold and silver which he scattered with a lavish hand from

Persia to France ;(4) his reign was marked by the vicissitudes, or rather by
the

combat, of rapaciousness and avarice, of splendour and poverty; he lived with
the

reputation of hidden treasures,(5) and bequeathed to his successor the payment
of

his debts. (6) Such a character has been justly accused by the voice of the
people

and of posterity: but public discontent is credulous; private malice is bold;
and a

lover of truth will peruse with a suspicious eye the instructive anecdotes of
Proco-

pius. The secret historian represents only the vices of Justinian, and those
vices

are darkened by his malevolent pencil. Ambiguous actions are imputed to the

worst motives: error is confounded with guilt, accident with design, and laws
with

abuses: the partial injustice of a moment is dexterously applied as the
general

maxim of a reign of thirty-two years: the emperor alone is made responsible
for

the faults of his officers, trie disorders of the times, and the corruption of
his sub­

jects; and even the calamities of nature, plagues, earthquakes, and
inundations,

are imputed to the prince of the demons, who had mischievously assumed the
form

of Justinian. (7)

After this precaution, I shall briefly relate the anecdotes of avarice and
rapine*

under the following heads.—I. Justinian was so profuse that he could not be
libe­

ral. The civil and military officers, when they were admitted into the service
of

the palace, obtained an humble rank and a moderate stipend; they ascended

by seniority to a station of affluence and repose; the annual pensions, of
which

the most honourable class was abolished by Justinian, amounted to four hun­

dred thousand pounds; and this domestic economy was deplored by the venal or

indigent courtiers as the last outrage on the majesty of the empire. The
posts,

the salaries of physicians, and the nocturnal illuminations, were objects of
more

general concern; and the cities might justly complain, that he usurped the
munici­

pal revenues which hud been appropriated to these useful institutions. Even
the

soldiers were injured; and such was the decay of military spirit, that they
were

injured with impunity. The emperor refused, at the return of each fifth year,

the customary donative of five pieces of gold, reduced his veterans to beg
their

bread, and suffered unpaid armies to melt away in the wars of Italy and
Persia.

II. The humanity of his predecessors had always remitted, in some auspicious
cir­

cumstance of their reign, the arrears of their public tribute; and they
dexterous­

ly assumed the merit of resigning those claims, which it was impracticable to
en­

force. " Justinian, in the space of thirty-two years has never granted a
similar

(1) Evagrtni (lib. iii. c. 39, 40.) is minute and grateful, but angry with
Zosimus for calumniating; the great

ConstAntine. In collecting all the bonds and records of the tax, the humanity
of Anastasius was diligent and

artful; fathers were sometimes compelled to prostitute their daughters (Zosim.
Hist. lib. ii. c. 38. p. 185,16S.

LipsUe, 17840 Timotheus of Gaza chose such an event for the subject of a
tragedy (Suidas, torn. iii. p. 475.,)

which contributed to the abolition of the tax (Cedrenus, p. 31.;) a happy
instance (if it be true) of the use of

the theatre.

(3) See Jmna Stylites, in the Bibliotheca Orientalis of Asseman. (torn, i. p.
268.) This capitation-tax is slight­

ly mentioned in the Chroniele of Edessa.

(3) Proeopius (Anecdot. c 19.) fixes this sum from the report of the
treasurers themselves. Tiberius had

vice* ter millies; but far different was his empire from that of Anastasius.

(4) Eyagrius (lib. iv. c. 30.,) in the next generation, was moderate and well-
informed; and Zonaras (lib. xiv.

c. 61.0 ib the twelfth century, had read with care, and thought without
prejudice; yet their colours are almost

as black as those of the Anecdotes.

(5) Proeopius (Anecdot. c. 30.) relates the idle conjectures or the times. The
death of Justinian, says the

secret historian, will expose his wealth or poverty.

(6) See Corippus de Laudibus Justini Aug. lib. ii. 260, &c. 384, &c.

" Pturima sunt vivo nimium ncglecia parenli.

Untie tot exhaustus contraxit debita fiscus."

Centenaries of gold were brought by strong arms into the hippodrome.—

Debita genitoris persolvit, cauta recepit."

(?) The Anecdotes (o. xi. 14.18.20. So.) supply many facts and more comploinM.

