OF T.HE ROMAN EMPIRE. 419

they fasted, they prayed, they studied the Koran and the tradition of the San-

nites; they performed with zeal and knowledge the functions of their
ecclesiasti­

cal character. The respect of nations still waited on the successors of the
apos­

tle, the oracles of the law and conscience of the faithful; and the weakness
or di­

vision of their tyrants sometimes restored the Abbassides to the sovereignty
of

Bagdad. But their misfortunes had been imbittered by the triumph of of the Fa-

timites, the real or spurious progeny of Ali. Arising from the extremity of
Afri­

ca, these successful rivals extinguished in Egypt and Syria, both the
spiritual and

temporal authority of the Abbassides; and the monarch of the Nile insulted the

humble pontiff on the banks of the Tigris.

In the declining age of the caliphs, in the century which elapsed after the
war

of Theophilus and Motassem, the hostile transactions of the two nations were

confined to some inroads by sea and land, the fruits of their close vicinity
and in­

delible hatred. But when the eastern world was convulsed and broken, the

Greeks were roused from their lethargy by the hopes of conquest and revenge.

The Byzantine empire, since the accession of the Basilian race, had reposed in

peace and dignity; and they might encounter with their entire strength the
front

of some petty emir, whose rear was assaulted and threatened by his national
foes

of the Mahometan faith. The lofty titles of the morning star, and the death of

the Saracens,(l) were applied in the public acclamations to Nicephorus Phocas,
a

prince as renowned in the camp as he was unpopular in the city. In the
subordi­

nate station of great domestic, or general of the east, he reduced the island
of

Crete, and extirpated the nest of pirates who had so long defied, with
impunity,

the majesty of the empire. (2) His military genius was displayed in the
conduct

and success of the enterprise, which had so often failed with loss and
dishonour.

The Saracens were confounded with the landing of his troops on safe and level

bridges, which he cast from the vessels to the shore. Seven months were con­

sumed in the siege of Candia: the despair of the native Cretans was stimulated
by

the frequent aid of their brethren of Africa and Spain; and after the massy
wall

and double ditch had been stormed by the Greeks, a hopeless conflict was still

maintained in the streets and houses of the city. The whole island was subdued

in the capital, and a submissive people accepted, without resistance, the
baptism

of the conqueror. (3) Constantinople applauded the long-forgotten pomp of a
tri­

umph; but the imperial diadem was the sole reward that could repay the
services,

or satisfy the ambition, of Nicephorus.

After the death of the younger Romanus, the fourth in lineal descent of the
Ba-

silian race, his widow Theophania successively married Nicephorus Phocas, and

his assassin John Zimisces, the two heroes of the age. They reigned as the
guar­

dians and colleagues of her infant sons; and the twelve years of their
military

command form the most splendid period of the Byzantine annals. The subjects

and confederates, whom they led to war, appeared, at least in the eyes of an
ene­

my, two hundred thousand strong: and of these about thirty thousand were armed

■with cuirasses:(4) a train of four thousand mules attended their march; and
their

evening camp was regularly fortified with an enclosure of iron spikes. A
series

of bloody and undecisive combats is nothing more than an anticipation of what

would have been effected in a few years by the course of nature; but I shall
briefly

prosecute the conquests of the two emperors from the hills of Cappadocia to
the

desert of Bagdad. The sieges of Mopsuestia and Tarsus in Cicilia first
exercised

the skill and perseverance of their troops, on whom, at this moment, I shall
not

hesitate to bestow the name of Romans. In the double city of Mopsuestia, which

is divided by the river Sarus, two hundred thousand Moslems were predestined
to

death or slavery,(5) a surprising degree of population, which must at least
include

(1) Liutprand, whose choleric temper was imbittered by his uneasy situation,
suggests the names of re­

proach and contempt more applicable to Nicephorus than the vain titles of the
Greeks, Ecce venit stelia matu-

tina, surgit Eous, rererberat obtutu solis radios, pallida Saracenorum mors,
Nicephorus /uW.

(2) Notwithstanding the insinuations of Zonaras, x*i s* etc. (torn. ii.
lib.xvi; p. 197.) it is an undoubt­

ed fact, that Crete was completely and finally subdued by Nicephorus Phocas.
(Pagi, Critica, torn. iii. p. 873.

—875. Meursius, Creta, lib. iii. c. 7. torn. iii. p. 404,465.

(3) A Greek life of St. Nicon, the Armenian, was found in the Sforza library,
and translated into Latin by

the Jesuit Sirmond for the use of cardinal Baronius. This cotemporary legend
casts a ray of light on Crete

and Peloponnesus in the tenth century. He found the newly recovered island,
fasdis dctestandse Agarenorum

superstitionis vestigiis adhuc plenam ac refertam ... but Mie rictorious
missionary, perhaps with some carnal

aid, adbaptismum omnes verseque fiilei disciplinam pepnlit. Eccletiis per-
totam insulam sedificaris, &c.

(Anual. Eccies. A. D.961.)

(4) Elmacin, Hist. Saracen, p. 278, 279. Liutprand was disposed to depreciate
the Greek power, yet he

-owns that Nicephorus led against Assyria an army of eighty thousand men.

(5) Ducenta fere millia horainum numerabat urbs, (Abulfeda. Annal. Moslem, p.
231.) of Mopsuestia, or

Jlafifa, Mampsyita, MaiuislB, Manuita, at it is corruptly, Or perhaps more
correctly, styled in the middle ag*v.

