OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ■ >.>!

vision and prophecy; he unfurled the holy banner; and a rash promise of
success

too hastily dropped from the lips of the apostle. His march from Medina to

Mecca displayed the peaceful and solemn pomp of a pilgrimage; seventy camels,

chosen and bedecked for sacrifice, preceded the van; the sacred territory was
re­

spected, and the captives were dismissed without ransom to proclaim his
clemen­

cy and devotion. But no sooner did Mahomet descend into the plain, within a

day's journey of the city, than he exclaimed, " they have clothed themselves
with

the skins of tigers;" the numbers and resolution of the Koreish opposed his
pro­

gress; and the roving Arabs of the desert might desert or betray a leader whom

they had followed for the hopes of spoil. The intrepid fanatic sunk into a
cool

and cautious politician: he waved in the treaty his title of apostle of God,
conclu­

ded with the Koreish and their allies a truce of ten years, engaged to restore
the

fugitives of Mecca who should embrace his religion, and stipulated only, for
the

ensuing year, the humble privilege of entering the city as a friend, and of
remain­

ing three days to accomplish the rites of the pilgrimage. A cloud of shame and

sorrow hung on the retreat of the Mussulmans, and their disappointment might

justly accuse the failure of a prophet who had so often appealed to the
evidence of

success. The faith and hope of the pilgrims were rekindled by the prospect of

Mecca: their swords were sheathed; seven times in the footsteps of the apostle

they encompassed the Caaba: the Koreish had retired to the hills, and Mahomet,

after the customary sacrifice, evacuated the city on the fourth day. The
people

were edified by his devotion; the hostile chiefs were awed, or divided, or
seduced;

and both Caled and Amrou, the future conquerors of Syria and Egvpt, most sea­

sonably deserted the sinking cause of idolatry. The power of Mahomet was in­

creased by the submission of the Arabian tribes: ten thousand soldiers were
as­

sembled for the conquest of Mecca; and the idolaters, the weaker part, were
easi­

ly convicted of violating the truce. Enthusiasm and discipline impelled the

march, and preserved the secret, till the blaze of ten thousand fires
proclaimed

to the astonished Koreish, the design, the approach, and the irresistible
force of

the enemy. The haughty Abu Sophian presented the keys of the city, admired

the variety of arms and ensigns that passed before him in review; observed
that

the son of Abdallah had acquired a mighty kingdom, and confessed, under the

scimitar of Omar, that he was the apostle of the true God. The return of
Marius

and Svlla was stained with the blood of the Romans: the revenge of Mahomet was

stimulated by religious zeal, and his injured followers were eager to execute
or to

prevent the order of a massacre. Instead of indulging their passions and his
own,(l)

the victorious exile forgave the guilt, and united the factions of Mecca. His

troops, in three divisions, marched into the city; eight and twenty of the
inhabi­

tants were slain by the sword of Caled: eleven men and six women were pro­

scribed by the sentence of Mahomet; but he blamed the cruelty of his
lieutenant;

and several of the most obnoxious victims were indebted for their lives to his
cle­

mency or contempt. The chiefs of the Koreish were prostrate at his feet. "
What

mercy can you expect from the man whom you have wronged?—We confide in

the generosity of our kinsman.—And you shall not confide in vain; begone! you

are safe, you are free." The people of Mecca deserved their pardon by the pro­

fession of Islam; and after an exile of seven years, the fugitive missionary
was en­

throned as the prince and prophet of his native country.(2) But the three hun­

dred and sixty idols of the Caaba were ignominiously broken; the house of God

was purified and adorned; as an example to future times, the apostle again
fulfilled

the duties of a pilgrim: and a perpetual law was enacted, that no unbeliever
should

dare to set his foot on the territory of the holy city. (3)

The conquest of Mecca determined the faith and obedience of the Arab

fl) After thp conquest of Mecca, the Mahomet of Voltaire imagines and
perpetratps the most horrid crimes.

The poet confesses, that he is not supported by the truth of history, and can
only allege, que celui qui fait la

guerre a sa patrie au nom de Diett, est capable de tout. (Oeuvres de Voltaire,
torn. xv. p. 282.) The maxim is

neither charitable nor philosophic; and some reverence is surely due to the
fame of heroes and the religion of

nations. I am informed that a Turkish ambassador at Paris was much scandalized
at the representation of

this tragedy.

(2) The Mahometan doctors still dispute, whether Mecca was reduced by lorce or
consent (Abulfeda, p. 107.

et Gagnier ad locum;) and this verbal controversy is of as much moment as our
own about William the Con-

Qvtror.

(3) In excluding the Christians from thepeninsula of Arabia, the province of
Hejaz, or the navigation of the

Tied Sea, Chardin (Voyages en Perses, torn. iv. p. 156.) and Reland (Dissert.
Misccll. torn. iii. p. 51.) are more rigid

than the Mussulmans themselves. The Christians are received without scruple
into the ports of Mocha, and

even of Oedda, and it is only the city and precincts of Mecca that are
inaccessible to the profane. (Niebulir,

Description de 1'Arabic, p. 308,309, Voyage en Arable, torn. i. p. 205,248.
&e.)

