OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 195

his throne, while the Persian envoys, in silk robes, were seated by his
side.—" You

■see," said the haughty barbarian, " the proofs of my perfect union with the
great

king: and his lieutentant is ready to send into my camp a select band of three
thou­

sand warriors. Presume no longer to tempt your master with a partial and
inade­

quate ransom: your wealth and your city are the only presents worthy of my
accept­

ance. For yourselves, I shall permit you to depart, each with an under-garment

and a shirt; and, at my entreaty, my friend Sarbar will not refuse a passage
through

his lines. Your absent prince, even now a captive or a fugitive, has left
Constan­

tinople to its fate; nor can you escape the arms of the Avars and Persians,
unless

you could soar into the air like birds, unless like fishes, you could dive
into the

waves. "(1) During ten successive days the capital was assaulted by the Avars,

who had made some progress in the science of attack; they advanced to sap or
bat­

ter the wall, under the cover of the impenetrable tortoise; their engines
descharged

a perpetual volley of stones and darts; and twelve lofty towers of wood
exalted the

combatants to the height of the neighbouring ramparts. But the senate and peo-

Ele were animated by the spirit of Heraclius, who had detached to their relief
a

ody of twelve thousand cuirassiers; the powers of fire and mechanics were used

with superior art and success in the defence of Constantinople; and the
galleys,

with two and three ranks of oars, commanded the Bosphorus, and rendered the

Persians the idle, spectators of the defeat of their allies. The Avars were
re­

pulsed; a fleet of Sclavonian canoes were destroyed in the harbour; the
vassels of

the chagan threatened to desert, his provisions were exhausted, and after
burning

his engines, he gave the signal of a slow and formidable retreat. The devotion
of

the Romans ascribed this signal deliverance to the Virgin Mary; but the mother

of Christ would surely have condemned their inhuman murder of the Persian en­

voys, who were entitled to the rights of humanity, if they were not protected
by

the laws of nations. (2)

After the division of his army, Heraclius prudently retired to the banks of
the

Phasis, from whence he maintained a defensive war against the fifty thousand
gold

spears of Persia. His anxiety was relieved by the deliverance of
Constantinople;

his hopes were confirmed by a victory of his brother Theodoras; and to the
hostile

league of Chosroes with the Avars, the Roman emperor opposed the useful and

honourable alliance of the Turks. At his liberal invitation, the horde of Cho-

zars,(3) transported their tents from the plains of the Volga to the mountains
of

Georgia; Heraclius received them in the neighbourhood of Teflis, and the khan

with his nobles dismounted from their horses, if we may credit the Greeks, and

fell prostrate on the ground, to adore_ the purple of the Caesar. Such
voluntary

homage and important aid were entitled to the warmest acknowledgments; and

the emperor, taking off his own diadem, placed it on the head of the Turkish

prince, whom he saluted with a tender embrace and the appellation of son.
After a

sumptuous banquet he presented Ztebel with the plate and ornaments, the gold,

the gems, and the silk, which had been used at the imperial table, and, with
his

own hand, distributed rich jewels and ear-rings to his new allies. In a secret
in­

terview, he produced the portrait of his daughter Eudocia, (4) condescended to

flatter the barbarian with the promise of a fair and august bride, obtained ah
im­

mediate succour of forty thousand horse, and negotiated a strong diversion of
the

Turkish arms on the side of the Oxus.(5) The Persians in their turn, retreated

"with precipitation, in the camp of Edessa. Heraclius reviewed an army of
seven-

(1) A bird, a frog, a mouse, and five arrows, had been the present of the
Scythian king to Darius. (Hero-

dot. lib. iv. c. 131,132.) Suhstitnez one lettre a ces signes (says Rousseau,
with much (rood taste) plus ella

aera menecaute moins elle effrayera: ce ne fera queune faufarronade, dont
Darirjs n'eut fait querire, (Eroile,

torn. iii. p.*146.) Tet I much question whether the senate and people of
Constantinople laughed at this mes­

sage of the chagan.

(2) The Paschal Chronicle (p. 392—397.) gives a minute and authentic narrative
of the siege and deliverance

of Constantinople. Theophanes (p. 264.) adds some circumstances; and a faint
light may be obtained from

the smoke of George of Fisidia, who has composed a poem (de Belto Abarico, p.
45—54.) to commemorate

this auspicious event.

(3) The power of the Chozars prevailed in the seventh, eighth, and ninth
centuries. They were known to

the Greeks, the Arabs, and, under the name of Kosa, to the Chinese themselves.
Oe Guignes, Hist, des Hons,

tom.ii. part 2. p. 507—509.

. (4) Bpiphania, or Eudocia, the only daughter of Heraelins and his first wife
Eudocia, was bom at Constan­

tinople on the 7th of July, A. D. 611. Baptized the 15th of August,and crowned
(in the oratory of St. Ste­

phen in the palace) the 4th of October of the same year. At this time she was
about fifteen. Eudocia was

afterwards sent to her Turkish husband, but the news of his death stopped her
journey, and prevented the

consnm.natitin. (Ducange, Familia*. Byzantin. p. 118.)

. (5) Eimacin (Hist. Saracen, p. 13—16.) gives some curious and probable
facts: but his numbers are rather too

high—three hundred thousand Romans assembled at Edessa—-five hundred thousand
Persians killed at Nine-

Ten. The abatement of a cipher is scarcely enough to restore his sanity.

