OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 91

fidelity of Gubazes sustained the most rigorous trials. He patiently endured
the

Hardships of a savage life, and rejected with disdain the specious temptations
of

the Persian court. The king of the Lazi had been educated in the Christian
reli­

gion; his mother was the daughter of a senator; during his youth he had served
ten

years a silentiary of the Byzantine palace,(l) and the arrears of an unpaid
salary

were a motive of attachment as well as of complaint. But the long continuance

of his sufferings extorted from him a naked representation of the truth; and
truth

was an unpardonable libel on the lieutenants of Justinian, who, amidst the
delays

of a ruinous war, had spared his enemies, and trampled on his allies. Their
ma­

licious information persuaded the emperor, that his faithless vassal already
medi­

tated a second defection: an order was issued to send him prisoner to
Constantino­

ple; a treacherous clause was inserted, that he might be lawfully killed in
case of

resistance; and Gubazes, without arms, or suspicion of danger, was stabbed in
the

security of a friendly interview. In the first moments of rage and despair,
the Col-

chians would have sacrificed their country and religion to the gratification
of re­

venge. But the authority and eloquence of the wiser few, obtained a salutary
pause:

the victory of the Phasis restored the terror of the Roman arms, and the
emperor

was solicitous to absolve his own name from the imputation of so foul a
murder.

A judge of senatorial rank was commissioned to inquire into the conduct and

death of the king of the Lazi. He ascended a stately tribunal, encompassed by

the ministers of justice and punishment: in the presence of both nations, this
extra­

ordinary cause was pleaded, according to the forms of civil jurisprudence, and
some

satisfaction was granted to an injured people, by the sentence and execution
of the

meaner criminals. (2)

In peace, the king of Persia continually sought the pretences of a rupture;
but

no sooner had he taken up arms, than he expressed his desire of a sate and ho­

nourable treaty. During the fiercest hostilities, the two monarchs entertained
a

deceitful negotiation; and such was the superiority of Chosroes, that whilst
he

treated the Roman ministers with insolence and contempt, he obtained the most

unprecedented honours for his own ambassadors at the imperial court. The suc­

cessor of Cyrus assumed the majesty of the eastern sun, and graciously
permitted

his younger brother Justinian to reign over the west, with the pale and
reflected

splendour of the moon. This gigantic style was supported by the pomp and elo­

quence of Isdigune, One of the royal chamberlains. His wife and daughters,
with

a train of eunuchs and camels, attended the march of the ambassador; two
satraps

with golden diadems were numbered among his followers: he was guarded by five

hundred horse, the most valiant of the Persians; and the Roman governor of
Dara

wisely refused to admit more than twenty of this martial and hostile caravan.
When

Isdigune had saluted the emperor, and delivered his presents, he passed ten
months

at Constantinople without discussing any serious affairs. Instead of being
confined

to his palace, and receiving food and water from the hands of his keepers, the
Per­

sian ambassador, without spies or guards, was allowed to visit the capital;
and the

freedom of conversation and trade enjoyed by his domestics offended the preju­

dices of an age, which rigorously practised the law of nations, without
confidence

or courtesy. (3) By an unexampled indulgence, his interpreter, a servant below

the notice of a Roman magistrate, was seated, at the table of Justinian, by
the side

of his master; and one thousand pounds of gold might be assigned for the ex­

pense of his journey and entertainment. Yet the repeated labours of Isdigune

could procure only a partial and imperfect truce, which was always purchased
with

the treasures, and renewed at the solicitation, of the Byzantine court Many

years of fruitless desolation elapsed before Justinian and Chosroes were
compelled,

by mutual lassitude, to consult the repose of their declining age. At a confe­

rence held on the frontier, each party, without expecting to gain credit,
displayed

the power, the justice, and the pacific intentions of their respective
sovereigns;

but necessity and interest dictated the treaty of peace, which vms concluded
for a

term of fifty years, diligently composed in the Greek and Persian languages,
and

(1) In the palace of Constantinople there were thirty silentiariei, who are
styled hastati ante forts cubiculi,

t»k rjyw *»-*TT«T»i, an honourable title, which conferred the rank, without
imposing; thedutiei of a lenator

(Cod. Theodos. lib. vi. tit. 23. Gothufred. Comment, torn. ii. p. 120.) ....
^.

(I) Oo these judicial orations, Asrathias (lib. iii. p. 81—89. lib. iv. p.
108—119.) lavishes eighteen or twenty

pages of false and florid rhetoric. His ignorance or carelessness overlooks
the strongest argument against the

king t" "

Lazica—his former revolt. . . -

— nth. lib. i. c 7.:) and foreign ambas-

(Busbequius, epist. iii. p. 149. MM -

Bell's Travels, vol. ii. p. IWsrflJ.O

f3} Procopius represents the practice of the Gothic court of Havenna (Goth

aadors have been treated with the same jealousy and rigour in Turkey (n

fcc.,) Russia (Voyage d'Olearias, and China (Narrative of M. de Lange, in 1

