OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 67

filled their expectations of a hero; the meanest of his fellow-citizens were
embold­

ened by his gentle and gracious demeanour; and the martial train, which
attended

his footsteps, left his person more accessible than in a day of battle. Seven
thou­

sand horsemen, matchless for beauty and valour, were maintained in the
service,

■and at the private expense, of the general.(l) Their prowess was always con­

spicuous in single combats, or in the foremost ranks; and both parties
confessed,

that in the siege of Rome, the guards of Belisarius had alone vanquished the
bar­

barian host. Their numbers were continually augmented by the bravest and most

faithful of the enemy; and his fortunate captives, the Vandals, the Moors, and
the

Goths, emulated the attachment of his domestic followers. By the union of
libe­

rality and justice, he acquired the love of the soldiers, without alienating
the af­

fections of the people. The sick and wounded were relieved with medicines and

money; and, still more efficaciously, by the healing visits and smiles of
their com­

mander. The loss of a weapon or a horse was instantly repaired, and each deed

of valour was rewarded by the rich and honourable gifts of a bracelet or a
collar,

which were rendered more precious by the judgment of Belisarius. He was en­

deared to the husbandmen, by the peace and plenty which they enjoyed under the

shadow of his standard. Instead of being injured, the country was enriched by
the

inarch of the Roman armies; and such was the rigid discipline of their camp,
that

not an apple was gathered from the tree, not a path could be traced in the
fields

of corn. Belisarius was chaste and sober. In the license of a military life,
none

could boast that they had seen him intoxicated with wine: the most beautiful
cap­

tives of Gothic or Vandal race were offered to his embraces; but he turned
aside

from their charms, and the husband of Antonina was never suspected of
violating

the laws of conjugal fidelity. The spectator and historian of his exploits has
ob­

served, that, amidst the perils of war, he was daring without rashness,
prudent

without fear, slow or rapid according to the exigencies of the moment; that in
the

deepest distress he was animated by real or apparent hope, but that he was mo­

dest and humble in the most prosperous fortune. By these virtues he equalled
or

excelled the ancient masters of the military art. Victory, by sea and land,
at­

tended his arms. He subdued Africa, Italy, and the adjacent islands, led away
cap­

tives the successors of Genseric and Theodoric; filled Constantinople with the
spoils

of their palaces, and in the space of six years recovered half the provinces
of the

western empire. In his fame and merit, in wealth and power, he remained with­

out a rival, the first of the Roman subjects: the voice of envy could only
magnify

his dangerous importance; and the emperor might applaud his own discerning
spi­

rit which had discovered and raised the genius of Belisarius.

It was the custom of the Roman triumphs, that a slave should be placed behind

the chariot to remind the conqueror of the instability of fortune, and the
infirmi­

ties of human nature. Procopius, in his Anecdotes, has assumed that servile
and

ungrateful office. The generous reader may cast away the libel, but the
evidence

of facts will adhere to his memory; and he will reluctantly confess, that the
fame,

and even the virtue, of Belisarius, were polluted by the lust and cruelty of
his wife;

and that the hero deserved an appellation which may not drop from the pen of
the

decent historian. The mother of Antonina(2) was a theatrical prostitute, and
both

her father and grandfather exercised at Thessalonica and Constantinople the
vile,

though lucrative, profession of charioteers. In the various situations of
their for­

tune, she became the companion, the enemy, the sen-ant, and the favourite of
the

empress Theodora; these loose and ambitious females had been connected by si­

milar pleasures; they were separated by the jealousy of vice, and at length
re­

conciled by the partnership of guilt. Before her marriage with Belisarius, An-
•

tonina had one husband and many lovers; Phothis, the son of her former
nuptials,

was of an age to distinguish himself at the siege of Naples; and it was not
till the

autumn of her age and beauty (3) that she indulged a scandalous attachment to
a

(1) Procopim, Golh. lib. iii: c. 1. Aimo'.n. a French monk of the eleventh
cemnry. who >la'J obtained, and

lias disfigured some authentic information of nelisarios. mentions in his
name, twelve thousand patn or slates

mios propriis alimus stipendiis— besides eighteen thousand soldiers
(Historians of France, torn. in. De Gestis

Franc, lib. ii. c. 6. p. 48.)

(1) The diligence of Alemannus could add but little to the four first and most
curious chapters of Anec­

dotes. Of these strange anecdotes, a part may be true, because probable—and a
part true, because improba­

ble. Procopius most have known the former, and the latter he cuuM scarcely
invent.

(3) Procopius insinuates (Anccdot. c. 4.) that, when Belisarius returmd to
Italy, (A. D. 443.) Antonina

•was sixty years of age. A forced, hut more polite construction, which refers
that date to the moment when

he was writing, A. U. S'9.) would be compatible w ith the manhood of Phonos,
(Gothic, lib. i. c- 10.)

ia S3S.

