TO THE DECLINE AND FALL

anxious curiosity the letter which contained the sentence of his fate. " You
can­

not be ignorant how much you have deserved my displeasure. I am not insensi­

ble of the services of Antonina. To her merits and intercession I have granted

your life, and permit you to retain a part of your treasures, which might be
justly

forfeited to the state. Let your gratitude, where it is due, be displayed, not
in

words, but in your future behaviour." I know not how to believe or to relate
the

transports which the hero is said to have received this ignominious pardon. He

fell prostrate before his wife, he kissed the feet of his saviour, and he
devoutly pro­

mised to live the grateful and submissive slave of Antonina. A fine of one
hundred

and twenty thousand pounds sterling Was levied on the fortunes of Belisarius;
and

with the office of count, or master of the royal stable, he accepted the
conduct of

the Italian war. At his departure from Constantinople, his friends, and even
the

public, were persuaded that as soon as he regained his freedom, he would
renounce

his dissimulation; and that his wife, Theodora, and perhaps the emperor
himself,

would be sacrificed to the just revenge of a virtuous rebel. Their hopes were
de­

ceived; and the unconquerable patience and loyalty of Belisarius appear either
be­

low or above the character of a man.(1)

CHAPTER XLII.

SUUe of the Barbaric world.—Establishment of the Lombards on the
Danube.—Tribes and

. inroads of the Sclavonians.—Origin, empire, and embassies of the Turks.—The
flight

' of the Avars.—Chosroes I. or Nushirvan, king of Persia.—His prosperous reign
and

tears with the Romans.—The Cholchian or Lazicwar.—The Ethiopians.

Our estimate of personal merit is relative to the common faculties of mankind.

The aspiring efforts of genius, or virtue, either in active or speculative
life, are

measured, not so much by their real elevation, as by the height to which they
as­

cend above the level of their age or country; and the same stature, which in a

people of giants would pass unnoticed, must appear conspicuous in a race of
pigmies.

Leonidas, and his three hundred companions, devoted their lives at
Thermopylse;

but the education of the infant, the boy, and the man, had prepared,-and
almost

ensured, this memorable sacrifice; and each Spartan would approve, rather than

admire, an act of duty, of which himself and eight thousand of his fellow-
citizens

were equally capable. (2) The great Pompey might inscribe on his trophies,
that

he had defeated in battle two millions of enemies, and reduced fifteen hundred
ci­

ties from the lake Mseotis to the Red Sea;(3) but the fortune of Rome flew
before

his eagles; the nations were oppressed by their own fears, and the invincible
le­

gions which he commanded, had been formed by the habits of conquest, and the

discipline of ages. In this view, the character of Belisarius may be
deservedly

placed above the heroes of the ancient republics. His imperfections flowed
from

the contagion of the times; his virtues were his own, the free gift of nature
or re­

flection; he raised himself without a master or a rival; and so inadequate
were the

arms committed to his hand, that his sole advantage was derived from the pride

and presumption of his adversaries. Under his command, the subjects of
Justinian

often deserved to be called Romans: but the unwarlike appellation of Greeks
was

imposed as a term of reproach by the haughty Goths, who affected to blush,
that

they might dispute the kingdom of Italy with a nation of tragedians,
pantomimes,

andpirates. (4) The climate of Asia has indeed been found less congenial than
that

of Europe, to military spirit: those populous Countries were enervated by
luxury,

despotism, and superstition; and the monks were more expensive and more nume­

rous than the soldiers of the east. The regular force of the empire had once

(1) The continuator of t!ie chronicle of Marecllimis gives, in a few decent
words, the substance of the An­

ecdotes.—Belisarius de Oriente evocatu's, in offensam periculumque incurren*
grave, et invidise subjacens, rur-

sus remiutur in ltaliam. (p. 54.)

(2) It will tie a pleasure, not a task, to mad Herodotus (lib. vii. c.104.
134. p. 550. 61S.) The conversation of

Xerxes and Dentaratus at Thermnpytse, is one of the most interesting; and
moral scenes in history. It was

the torture of the royal Spartan to behold, with anguish and remorse, the
virtue of his country.

(3) See this proud inscription in Pliny. (Hist. Natur. vii. 27.) Few men have
more exquisitely tasted of

glory and disgrace, nor could Juvenal (Satir. 10.) produce a more striking
example of the vicissitudes of for­

tune, and the vanity of human wishes.

(4) Tpxtxou; if n» w srpoTip* cv^tvsc (j IraXwu r.xorrx tlSw, oti //ij
TpxyvSo-j;, *** vaurw; A.»»o?uT«;.

This last epithet of Procopius is too nobly translated by pirates: naval
thieves are the proper words: strippers

■of garments, either for injury or insult. (Demosthenes contra Conrfn.
inKeiske Orator. Grecian), ii, p. 1354.)

