OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

flict of eight years, the loss of some French generals was avenged by the
slaughter

of the most noble Huns: the relics of the nation submitted: the royal,
residence of

the chagan was left desolate and unknown: and the treasures, the rapine of two

hundred and fifty years, enriched the victorious troops, or decorated the
churches

of Italy and Gaul.(l) After the reduction.of Pannonia the empire of Charle­

magne was bounded only by the conflux of the Danube with the Teyss and the

Save: the provinces of Istria, Libumia, and Dalmatia, were an easy, though un­

profitable, accession; and it was an effect of his moderation, that he left
the ma­

ritime cities under the real or nominal sovereignty of the Greeks. But these
dis­

tant possessions added more to the reputation than to the power of the Latin
em­

peror; nor did he risk any ecclesiastical foundations to reclaim the
barbarians from

their vagrant life and idolatrous worship. Some canals of communication
between

the river, the Saone and the Meuse, the Rhine and the Danube, were faintly at­

tempted. (2) Their execution would have vivified the empire: and more cost and

labour were often wasted in the structure of a cathedral.

If we retrace the outlines of this geographical picture, it will be seen that
the

empire of the Franks extended between east and west, from the Ebro to the Elbe

or Vistula; between the north and south, from the duchy of Beneventum to the

river Eyder, the perpetual boundary of Germany and Denmark. The personal

and political importance of Charlemagne was magnified by the distress and
division

of the rest of Europe. The islands of Great Britain and Ireland were disputed
by

a crowd of princes of Saxon or Scottish origin; and, after the loss of Spain,
the

Christian and Gothic kingdom of Alphonso the Chaste, was confined to the nar­

row range of the Aslurian mountains. These petty sovereigns revered the power

or virtue of the Carlovingian monarch, implored the honour and support of his
al­

liance, and styled him their common parent, the sole and supreme emperor of
the

west(3) He maintained a more equal intercourse with the caliph Harun al

Rashid,(4) whose dominion stretched from Africa to India, and accepted from
his

ambassadors a tent, a water-clock, an elephant, and the keys of the holy
sepulchre.

It is not easy to conceive the private friendship of a Frank and an Arab, who
were

strangers to each other's person, and language, and religion* but their public
cor­

respondence was founded on vanity, and their remote situation left no room for
a

competition of interest. Two-thirds of the western empire of Rome were subject

to Charlemagne, and the deficiency was amply supplied by his command of the

inaccessible or invincible nations of Germany. But in the choice of his
enemies,

we may be reasonably surprised that he so often preferred the poverty of the
north

to the riches of the south. The three and thirty campaigns laboriously
consumed

in the woods and morasses of Germany, would have sufficed to assert the ampli­

tude of his title by the expulsion of the Greeks from Italy and the Saracens
from

Spain. The weakness of the Greeks would have ensured an easy victory: and the

^oly crusade against the Saracens would have been prompted by glory and
revenge,

and loudly justified by religion and policy. Perhaps, in his expeditions
beyond

the Rhine and the Elbe, he aspired to save his monarchy from the fate of the
Ro­

man empire, to disarm the enemies of civilized society, and to eradicate the
seed

of future emigrations. But it has been wisely observed, that in a light of
precau­

tion, all conquest must be ineffectual, unless it could be universal; since
the in­

creasing circle must be involved in a larger sphere of hostility.(5) The
subjugation

of Germany withdrew the veil which had so long concealed the continent or
island

of Scandinavia from the knowledge of Europe, and awakened the torpid courage

of their barbarous natives. The fiercest of the Saxon idolaters escaped from
the

(1) Jdaot pralia in eo gesta! quantum sanguinis efTusum sit! Testatur racna
omni habitations Pannonia, et

locus in quo regia Cagani fuit ita desertus, ut ne vestigium quidem humanee
habitationis appareat. Tota in

hoc bello Hunbrum nobilitas periit, tota gloria decidit, omnis pecunia et
congesti ex longo tempore thesaufi

direpti sunt.

(2} The junction of the Rhine and Danube was undertaken only for the service
of the Pannonian war.

(Gaillard, Vie de Charlemagne, torn. ii. p. 312—315.) The canal, which would
have been only two leagues in

length, and of which some traces are still extant in Swabta, was interrupted
by excessive rains, military avo­

cations, and superstitious fears, fSctuepflin, Hist, de l'Academie des
Inscriptions, torn, xviii. p. 256. Molimi

na fluviorura, See. jungendorum, p. 59—62.)

(3) See Eginhanri, c 16. and Gaillard, torn. ii. p. 361—385. who mentions,
with a loose reference, the inter­

course of Charlemagne and Egbert, the emperor's gilt of his own sword, and the
modest answer of his Saxon

disciple. The anecdote, if genuine, would have adorned our English histories.

(4) The correspondence is mentioned only in the French annals, and the
Orientals are ignorant of the ca­

liph's friendship for the Christian dog—a polite appellation, which Harun
bestows on the emperor of the

Creeks,

(5) Gaillard, torn. ii. p. 301—365. 471—470. 492. I have borrowed his
judicious remarks on Charlemagne's

plan of conquest, and the judicious distinction of his stnemies of the first
and the second tnctinte. Horn. it. p,

'84, 509, etc.)

