OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. . 251

tkmed for their reception, and returned to Constantinople, from whence they
were

distributed to their respective homes. But the freedom of Basil was naked and

destitute: his farm was ruined by the calamities of war: after his father's
death,

his manual labour or service, could no longer support a family of orphans; and
he

resolved to seek a more conspicuous theatre, in which every virtue and every
vice

may lead to the paths of greatness. The first night of his arrival at
Constantino­

ple, without friends or money, the weary pilgrim slept on the steps of the
church

of St. Diomede; he was fed by the casaal hospitality of a monk; and was intro­

duced to the service of a cousin and a namesake of the emperor Theophilus:
who,

though himself of a diminutive person, was always followed by a train of tall
and

handsome domestics. Basil attended his patron to the government of
Peloponnesus;

eclipsed, by his personal merit, the birth and dignity of Theophilus, and
formed

a useful connexion with a wealthy and charitable matron of Patras. Her
spiritual

or carnal love embraced the young adventurer, whom she adopted as her son.

Danielis presented him with thirty slaves; and the produce of her bounty was
ex­

pended in the support of his brothers, and the purchase of some large estates
in

Macedonia. His gratitude or ambition still attached him to the service of The­

ophilus; and a lucky accident recommended him to the notice of the court. A
fa­

mous wrestler, in the train of the Bulgarian ambassadors, had defied, at the
royal

banquet, the boldest and most robust of the Greeks. The strength of Basil was

praised: he accepted the challenge; and the barbarian champion was overthrown

at the first onset. A beautiful but vicious horse was condemned to be
hamstrung;

it was subdued by the dexterity and courage of the servant of Theophilus; and
his

conqueror was promoted to an honourable rank in the imperial stables. But it

was impossible to obtain the confidence of Michael without complying with his

vices; and his new favourite, the great chamberlain of the palace, was raised
and

supported by a disgraceful marriage with a royal concubine, and the dishonour
of

his sister, who succeeded to her place. The public administration had been
aban­

doned to the C<esar Bardas, the brother and enemy of Theodora; but the arts of

female influence persuaded Michael to hate and to fear his uncle: he was drawn

from Constantinople, under the pretext of a Cretan expedition, and stabbed in
the

tent of audience, by the sword of the chamberlain, and in the presence of the
em­

peror. About a month after this execution, Basil was invested with the title
of

Augustus and the government of the empire. He supported this unequal associa­

tion till his influence was fortified by popular esteem. His life was
endangered by

the caprice of the emperor; and his dignity was profaned by a second
colleague,

who had rowed in the galleys. Yet the murder of his benefactor must be con­

demned as an act of ingratitude and treason; and the churches which he
dedicated

to the name of St. Michael, were a poor and puerile expiation of his guilt.

The different ages of Basil I. may be compared with those of Augustus. The

situation of the Greek did not allow him in his earliest youth to lead an army

against his country, or to proscribe the noblest of her sons; but his aspiring
genius

stooped to the arts of a slave; he dissembled his ambition and even his
virtues, and

grasped, with the bloody hand of an assassin, the empire which he ruled with
the

wisdom and tenderness of a parent. A private citizen may feel his interest
repug­

nant to his duty; but it must be from a deficiency of sense or courage, that
an ab­

solute monarch can separate his happiness from his glory, or his glory from
the

public welfare. The life or panegyric of Basil has indeed been composed and

published under the long reign of his descendants; but even their stability on
the

throne may be justly ascribed to the superior merit of their ancestor. *In his
cha­

racter, his grandson Constantine has attempted to delineate a perfect image of

royalty; but that feeble prince, unless he had copied a real model, could not
ea­

sily have soared above the level of his own conduct or conceptions. But the
most

solid praise of Basil is drawn from the comparison of a ruined and a
flourishing

monarchy, that which he wrested from the dissolute Michael, and that which he

bequeathed to the Macedonian dynasty. The evils which had been sanctified by

time and example, were corrected by his master-hand; and he revived, if not
the

national spirit, at least the order and majesty of the Roman empire. His
appli­

cation was indefatigable, his temper cool, his understanding vigorous and
decisive;

and in his practice he observed that rare "and salutary moderation, which
pursues

each virtue, at an equal distance between the opposite vices. His military
service

liad been confined to the palace; nor was the emperor endowed with the spirit
or

the talents of a warrior. Yet under his reign the Roman arms were again formi­

dable to the barbarians. As soon as he had formed a new army by discipline and

