THE DECLINE AND FALL

thousand feet, were united by two bridges of sixty and of thirty boats,
connected

in the middle stream by the small island of Rouda, which was covered with gar­

dens and habitations. (1) The eastern extremity of the bridge was terminated
by

the town of Babylon and the camp of a Roman legion, which protected the pas­

sage of the river and the second capital of Egypt. This important fortress,

which might fairly be described as a part of Memphis or Misrah, was invested
by

Ihe arms of the lieutenant of Omar: a re-enforcement of four thousand Saracens

soon arrived in his camp; and the military engines, which battered the walls,

may be imputed to the art and labour of his Syrian allies. Yet the siege was
pro­

tracted to seven months; and the rash invaders were encompassed and threatened

by the inundation of the Nile.(2) Their last assault was bold and successful:
they

passed the ditch, which had been fortified with iron spikes, applied their
scaling-

ladders, entered the fortress with the shout of God is victorious! and drove
the

remnant of the Greeks to their boats, and the isle of Rouda. The spot was af­

terward recommended to the conqueror by the easy communication with the gulf

and the peninsula of Arabia: the remains of Memphis were deserted; the tents

of the Arabs were converted into permanent habitations: and the first mosch
was

blessed by the presenim of fourscore companions of Mahomet.(3) A new city

arose in their camp on the eastward bank of the Nile; and the contiguous quar­

ters of Babylon and Fostat are confounded in their present decay by the
appella­

tion of old Misrah or Cairo, of which they form an extensive suburb. But the

name of Cairo, the town of victory, more strictly belongs to the modern
capital

which was founded in the tenth century by the Fatimite caliphs. (4) It has
gra­

dually receded from the river; but the continuity of buildings may be traced
by

an attentive eye from the monuments of Sesostris to those of Saladin.(5)

Yet the Arabs, after a glorious and profitable enterprise, must have retreated

to the desert, had they not found a powerful alliance in the heart of the
country.

The rapid conquest of Alexander was assisted by the superstition and revolt of

the natives; they abhorred their Persian oppressors, the disciples of the
Magi,

who had burnt the temples of Egypt, and feasted with sacrilegious appetite on
the

flesh of the god Apis. (6) After a period of ten centuries the same revolution
was

renewed by a similar cause: and in the support of an incomprehensible creed,

the zeal of the Coptic Christians was equally ardent. I have already explained

the origin and progress of the Monophysite controversy, and the persecution of
the

emperors, which converted a sect into a nation, and alienated Egypt from their

religion and government. The Saracens were received as the deliverers of the

Jacobite church; and a secret and effectual treaty was opened during the siege
of

Memphis between a victorious army and a people of slaves. A rich and noble

Egyptian, of the name of Mokawkas, had dissembled his faith to obtain the ad­

ministration of his province; in the disorders of the Persian war he aspired
to in­

dependence; the embassy of Mahomet ranked him among princes; but he declined,

with rich gifts and ambiguous compliments, the proposal of a new religion.(7)

The abuse of his trust exposed him to the resentment of Heraclius; his submis­

sion was delayed by arrogance and fear; and his conscience was prompted by in-

proper Egypt, Ammianns enumerates Memphis among the four cities, maximis
utbibns quibus provincia nilet;

(22. 16.) and the name of Memphis appears with distinction in the Roman
Itinerary and episcopal lists.

(1) These rare and curious facts, the breadth (two thousand nine hundred and
forty-six feet) and the bridge

of the Nile, are only to be found in the Danish traveller and the Nubian
geographer, (p. 98.)

(2) From the month of April, the Nile begins impeiceptibly to rise; the swell
becomes strong and visible in

the moon after the summer solstice, (Piin. Hist. Nat 5. 10.) and is usually
proclaimed at Cairo on St. Peter's

day. (June 29.) A register of thirty successive years marks the greatest
height of the waters between Jury 25

and August 18. (Maillet, Description de l'Egypte, letlre 11. p. 67, &c.
Pocoek's Description of the East, vol.

i. p. 200. Shaw's Travels, p. 383.)

(3) Murtadi, MerreiUes de l'Egypte, 243 —259. He expatiates on the subject
with the zeal and minuteness

of a citizen and a bigot, and his local traditions have a strong air of truth
and accuracy.

(4) D'Herbelot,BibliotlieqtteOrientale, p. 233.

(5) The position of New and Old Cairo is well known, and has been often
described. Two writers, who were

intimately acquainted with ancient and modern Egypt, have fixed, after a
learned inquiry, the city of Mem­

phis at Gach, directly opposite the Old Cairo. (Sicard, Nouveaux Memoirs des
Missions du Levant, torn. vi. p.

S, 6. Shaw's Observations and Travels, p. 296—304.) Yet we may not disregard
the authority or the arguments

ufPocock. (vol. i. p. 25—41.) Niebuhr, (Voyage, tom.i. p. 77—106.) and, above
all, of d'Anville, (Description

de l'Egypte, p. Ill, 112. 130—149.) who have removed Memphis towards the
village of Mohannah, some miles

farther to the south. In their bear, the disputants have forgot that the ample
space of a metropolis covers and

annihilates the far greater part of the controversy.

(6) See Herodotus, lib. in. c. 27—29. jE'ian Hist. Var. lib. iv. c. 8. Suidas,
in £!%».-, torn. ii. p. 774. Diodor.

Sictil. torn. ii. lib. xvii. p. 197. edit. Wesseling. Tov Ilsprav w-&wrm it;
t« nf«, says the last of these historians.

. (») Mi.kawkas sent the prophet two Coptic damsels, with two maids, and one
eunuch, an alabaster vase, an

ingot of pure gold, oil. honey, and ilie finest white linen of Egypt, with a
hone, a mule, and an ass, distin­

guished by iheir respective qualifications. The embassy of Mahumet was
despatched from Medina its the se­

venth year of the Hegira. (A. D. 623.) See Gaguier, (Viede Mahomit, torn. ii.
p. 255,256.303.) from Al JannaVi.

