OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 83

liing! the favourable moment; the east is left without defence, while the
armies of

Justinian and his renowned general are detained in the distant regions of the
west.

If you hesitate and delay, Belisarius and his victorious troops will soon
return from

the Tiber to the Tigris, and Persia may enjoy the wretched consolation of
being

the last devoured. "(1) By such arguments, Chosroes was easily persuaded to
imi­

tate the example which he condemned: but the Persian, ambitious of military

fame, disdained the inactive warfare of a rival, who issued his sanguinary
com­

mands from the secure station of the Byzantine palace.

Whatever might be the provocation of Chosroes, he abused the confidence of

treaties; and the just reproaches of dissimulation and falsehood could only be
con­

cealed by the lustre of his victories. (2) The Persian army, which had been
as­

sembled in the plains of Babylon, prudently declined the strong cities of
Mesopo­

tamia, and followed the western bank of the Euphrates, till the small though
popu­

lous town of Dura presumed to arrest the progress of the great king. 1 he
gates

of Dura, by treachery and surprise, were burst open; and as soon as Chosroes
had

stained his simitar with the blood of the inhabitants, he dismissed the
ambassador

of Justinian to inform his master in what place he had left the enemy of the
Ro­

mans. The conqueror still affected the praise of humanity and justice: p.nd as
he

heheld a noble matron with her infant rudely dragged along the ground, he
sighed,

he wept, and implored the divine justice to punish the author of these
calamities.

Yet the herd of twelve thousand captives was ransomed for two hundred pounds

of gold; the neighbouring bishop of Sergiopolis pledged his faith for the
payment;

and in the subsequent year, the unfeeling avarice of Chosroes exacted the
penalty

of an obligation which it was generous to contract, and impossible to
discharge.

He advanced into the heart of Syria; but a feeble enemy, who vanished at his
ap­

proach, disappointed him of the honour of victory; and as he could not hope to
es­

tablish his dominion, the Persian king displayed in this inroad the mean and
rapa­

cious vices of a robber. Hierapolis, Berrhac or Aleppo, Apamea, and Chalcis,

were successively besieged: they redeemed their safety by a ransom of gold or
sil­

ver, proportioned to their respective strength and opulence; and their new
master

enforced, without observing, their terms of capitulation. Educated in the
religion

of the Magi, he exercised without remorse the lucrative trade of sacrilege;
and,

after stripping of its gold and gems a piece of the true cross, he generously
restored

the naked relic to the devotion of the Christians of Apamea. No more than
four­

teen years had elapsed since Antioch was ruined by an earthquake; but the
queen

of the east, the new Theopolis, had been raised from the ground by the
liberality

of Justinian: and the increasing greatness of the buildings and the people
already

erased the memory of this recent disaster. On one side, the city was defended
by

the mountain, on the other by the river Orontes; but the -most accessible part
was

commanded by a superior eminences the proper remedies were rejected, from the

despicable fear of discovering its weakness to the enemy; and Germanus, the
em­

peror's nephew, refused to trust his person and dignity within the walls of a
be­

sieged city. The people of Antioch had inherited the vain and satirical genius
of

their ancestors; they were elated by a sudden re-enforcement of six thousand
sol­

diers; they disdained the offers of an easy capitulation; and their
intemperate cla­

mours insulted from the ramparts the majesty of the great king. Under his eye

the Persian myriads mounted with scaling ladders to the assault; the Roman
mer­

cenaries fled through the opposite gate of Daphne; and the generous assistance
of

the youth of Antioch served only to aggravate the miseries of their country.
As

Chosroes, attended by the ambassadors of Justinian, was descending from the
moun­

tain, he affected, in a plaintive voice, to deplore the obstinacy and ruin of
that un­

happy people; but the slaughter still raged with unrelenting fury, and the
city, at

the command of a barbarian, was delivered to the flames. The cathedral of An­

tioch was indeed preserved by the avarice, not the pity, of the conqueror: a
more

honourable exemption was granted to the church of St. Julian, and the quarter
of

the town where the ambassadors resided; some distant streets were saved by the

shifting of the wind, and the walls still subsisted to protect, and soon to
betray,

their new inhabitants. Fanaticism had defaced the ornaments of Daphne, but

(1) 1 have blended, in a short speech, the two oraiions of the Arsacides of
Armenia and the Gothic ambassa­

dors. Procopiiis. in his public history, feels, and makes us feel, that
Justinian was the true author of the war

(Persic, lib. if. e. 2,3.)

(2) The invasion of Syria, the ruin of Antioch, &c. are related in a full and
regular series by Procopiiis

(Persic, lib. ii. c. 5—14.) Small collateral aid can be drawn from the
orientals: yet not they, but D'Hcrbetot

himself (p. 080.,) should blush, when he blames them for makiwr Justinian and
Nushirvan cotemporaries. On

the geography of the seat of war, D'Anrille (1'Eophrate et Ie Tigre)
issufficient and satisfactory.

