OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 393

isants achieved the conquest of Transoxiana and Spain, a third army of
Saracens

overspread the provinces of Asia Minor, and approached the borders of the By­

zantine capital. But the attempt and disgrace of the second siege, was
reserved

for his brother Soliman, whose ambition appears to have been quickened by a

more active and martial spirit. In the revolutions of the Greek empire after
the

tyrant Justinian had been punished and avenged, an humble secretary,
Anastasius

or Artemius, was promoted by chance or merit to the vacant purple. He was

alarmed by the sound of war; and his ambassador returned from Damascus with

the tremendous news, that the Saracens were preparing an armament by sea and

land, such as would transcend the experience of the past, or the belief of the
pre­

sent age. The precautions of Anastasius were not unworthy of his station, or
of

the impending danger. He issued a peremptory mandate, that all persons who

were not provided with the means of subsistence for a three years' siege
should

evacuate the city; the public granaries and arsenals were abundantly
replenished;

the walls were restored and strengthened; and the engines for casting stones,
or

darts, or fire, were stationed along the ramparts, or in the brigantines of
war, of

which an additional number was hastily constructed. To prevent, is safer, as

well as more honourable, than to repel an attack; and a design was meditated,

above the usual spirit of the Greeks, of burning the naval stores of the
enemy,

the cypress timber that had been hewn in mount Libanus, and was piled along
the

sea-shore of Phoenicia, for the service of the Egyptian fleet. This generous
en­

terprise was defeated by the cowardice or treachery of the troops, who in the
new

language of the empire, were styled of the ubseguian theme.(l) They murdered

their chief, deserted their standard in the isle of Rhodes, dispersed
themselves

over the adjacent continent, and deserved pardon or reward by investing with
the

purple a simple officer of the revenue. The name of Theodosius might recom­

mend him to the senate and people; but, after some months, he sunk into a
clois­

ter, and resigned, to the firmer hand of Leo, the Isaurian, the urgent defence
of

the capital and empire. The most formidable of the Saracens, Moslemah, the

brother of the caliph, was advancing at the head of one hundred and twenty
thou­

sand Arabs and Persians, the greater part mounted on horses or camels; and the

successful sieges of Tyana, Amorium, and Pergamus, were of sufficient duration

to exercise their skill, and to elevate their hopes. At the well-known passage
of

Abydus, on the Hellespont, the Mahometan arms were transported for the first

time, from Asia to Europe. From thence, wheeling round the Thracian cities of

the Propontis, Moslemah, invested Constantinople on the land side, surrounded
his

camp with a ditch and rampart, prepared and planted his engines of assault,
and

declared, by words and actions, a patient resolution of expecting the return
of

seed-time and harvest, should the obstinacy of the besieged prove equal to his

own. The Greeks would gladly have ransomed their religion and empire, by a

fine or assessment of a piece of gold on the head of each inhabitant of the
city;

but the liberal offer was rejected with disdain, and the presumption of
Moslemah

was exalted by the speedy approach and invincible force of the navies of Egypt

and Syria. They are said to have amounted to eighteen hundred ships: the num­

ber betrays their inconsiderable size; and of the twenty stout and capacious
ves­

sels, whose magnitude impeded their progress, each was manned with no more

than one hundred heavy armed soldiers. This huge armada proceeded on a

smooth sea and with a gentle gale, towards the mouth of the Bosphorus; the
sur­

face of the strait was overshadowed, in the language of the Greeks, with a
moving;

forest, and the same fatal night had been fixed by the Saracen chief for a
general

assault by sea and land. To allure the confidence of the enemy, the emperor
had

thrown aside the chain that usually guarded the entrance of the harbour; but

while they hesitated whether they should seize the opportunity, or apprehend
the

snare, the ministers of destruction were at hand. The fireships of the Greeks

■were launched against them; the Arabs, their arms, and vessels, were involved
in

the same flames; the disorderly fugitives were dashed against each other, or

overwhelmed in the waves; and I no longer find a vestige of the fleet, that
had

threatened to extirpate the Roman name. A still more fatal and irreparable
loss

was that of the caliph Soliman, who died of an indigestion(2) in his camp near

(1) In the division of the themes, or provinces described by Constantine
Porphyroffenitus de Thematibus, (lib.

i. p. 9,10.) theobieguiwn^n Latin appellation of the army aod palace,
wasthefourfn in the public order. Nice

van the metropolis, and its jurisdiction extended from the Hellespont over the
adjacent parts of Bithynia and

Phrygia, (See the two maps prefixed by Delisle to the Imperinm Orientate of
Bfttiduri.)

(2) The caliph had emptied two baskets of egjrsand office, which be swallowed
alternately, and the repast

w as concluded with marrow and sugar, lu one of his pilgrimages to Mecca,
Solomon ate, at a single meal.se­

