250 THE DECLINE AND FALL

sic and poetry, betrayed some symptoms of a liberal taste: the more ignoble
arte

of the son of Theophilus were confined to the chariot-race of the hippodrome.
The

four factions which had agitated the peace, still amused the idleness, of the
capi­

tal: for himself, the emperor assumed the blue livery; the three rival colours
were

distributed to his favourites, and in the vile, though eager contention, he
forgot the

dignity of his person, and the safety of his dominions. He silenced the
messenger

of an invasion, who presumed to divert his attention in the most critical
moment

of the race; and by his command, the importunate beacons were ektinguished,

that too frequently spread the alarm from Tarsus to Constantinople. The most

skilful charioteers obtained the first place in his confidence and esteem;
their me­

rit was profusely rewarded: the emperor feasted in their houses, and presented

their children at the baptismal font; and while he applauded his own
popularity,

he affected to blame the cold and stately reserve of his predecessors. The
unna­

tural lusts which had degraded even the manhood of Nero, were banished from

the world; yet the strength of Michael was consumed by the indulgence of love

and intemperance. In his midnight revels, when his passions were inflamed by

wine, he was provoked to issue the most sanguinary commands; and if any
feelings

of humanity were left, he was reduced, with the return of sense, to approve
the

salutary disobedience of his servants. But the most extraordinary feature in
the

character of Michael, is the profane mockery of the religion of his country.
The

superstition of the Greeks might indeed excite the smile of a philosopher: but
his

smile would have been rational and temperate, and he must have condemned the

ignorant folly of a youth who insulted the objects of public veneration. A
buffoon

of the court was invested in the robes of the patriarch; the twelve
metropolitans,

among whom the emperor was ranked, assumed their ecclesiastical garments: they

used or abused the sacred vessels of the altar; and in their bacchanalian
feasts,

the holy communion was administered in a nauseous compound of vinegar and mus­

tard. Nor were these impious spectacles concealed from the eyes of the city.

On the day of a solemn festival, the emperor, with his bishops or buffoons,
rode

on asses through the streets; encountered the true patriarch at the head of
his

clergy; and by their licentious shouts and obscene gestures, disordered the
gravity

of the Christian procession. The devotion of Michael appeared only in some of­

fence to reason or piety: be received his theatrical crowns from the statue of
the

Virgin; and an imperial tomb was violated for the sake of burning the bones of

Constantine the Iconoclast. By this extravagant conduct, the son of Theophilus

became as contemptible as he was odious; every citizen was impatient for the
deli­

verance of his country; and even the favourites of the moment were apprehen­

sive that a caprice might snatch away what a caprice had bestowed. In the
thir­

tieth year of his age, and in the hour of intoxication and sleep, Michael III.
was

murdered in his chamber by the founder of a new dynasty, whom the emperor had

raised to an equality of rank and power.

The genealogy of Basil the Macedonian (if it be not the spurious offspring of

pride and flattery) exhibits a genuine picture of the revolution of the most
illus­

trious families. The Arsacides, the rivals of Rome, possessed the sceptre of
the

east near four hundred years: a younger branch of these Parthian kings
continued

to reign in Armenia; and their royal descendants survived the partition and
servi.-

tude of that ancient monarchy. Two of these, Artabanus and Chlienes, escaped

or retired to the court of Leo I.; his bounty seated them in a safe and
hospitable

exile, in the province of Macedonia: Adrianople was their final settlement.

During several generations they maintained the dignity of their birth; and
their

Roman patriotism rejected the tempting offers of the Persian and Arabian
powers,

who recalled them to their native country. But their splendour was insensibly

clouded by time and poverty: and the father "of Basil was reduced to a small
farm,

which he cultivated with his own hands: yet he scorned to disgrace the blood
of

the Arsacides by a plebeian alliance—his wife, a widow of Adrianople, was

pleased to count ameng her ancestors, the great Constantine; and their royal
in­

fant was connected by some dark affinity of lineage or country with the
Macedonian

Alexander. No sooner was he born, than the cradle of Basil, his family, and
his

city, were swept away by an inundation of the Bulgarians: he was educated a
slave

in a foreign land; and in this severe discipline, he acquired the hardiness of
body

and flexibility of mind which promoted his future elevation. In the age of
youth

or manhood he shared the deliverance of the Roman captives, who generously

broke their fetters, marched through Bulgaria to the shores of the Euxine, de­

feated two armies of the barbarians, embarked in the ships which had been sta­

