J38 THE DECLINE AND FALL • *

with the sister of Moses, the mother of Jesus, and Fatima, the best beloved of
hto

daughters. "Was she not old?" said Ayesha, with the insolence of a blooming

beauty, " has not God given you a better in her place?—No, by God," said Ma­

homet, with an effusion of honest gratitude, "there never can be a better! she
be­

lieved in me, when men despised me; she relieved my wants, when I was poor and

persecuted by the world. "(1)

In the largest indulgence of polygamy, the founder of a religion and empire

might aspire to multiply the chances of a numerous posterity and a lineal
succes­

sion. The hopes of Mahomet were fatally disappointed. The virgin Ayesha, and

his ten widows of mature age and approved fertility, were barren in his potent

embraces. The four sons of Cadijah died in their infancy. Mary, his Egyptian

concubine, was endeared to him by the birth of Ibrahim. At the end of fifteen

months the prophet wept over his grave: but he sustained with firmness the
rail­

lery of his enemies, and checked the adulation or credulity of the Moslems, by

the assurance that an eclipse of the sun was not occasioned by the death of
the

infant. Cadijah had likewise given him four daughters, who were married to the

most faithful of his disciples: the three eldest died before their father; but
Fatima,

who possessed his confidence and love, became the wife of her cousin Ali, and
the

mother of an illustrious progeny. The merit and misfortunes of Ali and his de­

scendants will lead me to anticipate, in this place, the series of the Saracen
ca­

liphs, a title which describes the commanders of the faithful as the vicars
and suc­

cessors of the apostle of God. (2)

The birth, the alliance, the character, of Ali, which exalted him above the
rest

of his countrymen, might justify his claim to the vacant throne of Arabia. The

son of Abu Taleb was, in his own right, the chief of the family of Hashem, and

the hereditary prince or guardian of the city and temple of Mecca. The light
of

prophecy was extinct; but the husband of Fatima might expect the inheritance

and blessing of her father: the Arabs had sometimes been patient of a female

reign; and the two grandsons of the prophet had often been fondled in his lap,
and

shown in his pulpit, as the hope of his age, and the chief of the youth of
para­

dise. The first of the true believers might aspire to march before them in
this

world and in the next; and if some were of a graver and more rigid cast, the
zeal

and virtue of Ali were never outstripped by any recent proselyte. He united
the

qualifications of a poet, a soldier; and a saint: his wisdom still breathes in
a collec­

tion of moral and religious sayings;(3) and every antagonist, in the combats
of the

tongue, or of the sword, was subdued by his eloquence and valour. From the
first

hour of his mission to the last rites of his funeral, the apostle was never
forsaken

by a generous friend, whom he delighted to name his brother, his vicegerent,
and

the faithful Aaron of a second Moses. The son of Abu Taleb was afterward re­

proached for neglecting to secure his interest by a solemn declaration of his
right,

which would have silenced all competition, and sealed his succession by the
de­

crees of heaven. But the unsuspecting hero confided in himself, the jealousy
of

empire, and perhaps the fear of opposition, might suspend the resolutions of
Ma­

homet; and the bed of sickness was besieged by the artful Ayesha, the daughter

of Abubeker, and the enemy of Ali.

The silence and death of the prophet restored the liberty of the people; and
his

companions convened an assembly to deliberate on the choice of a successor.
The

hereditary claim and lofty spirit of Ali, were offensive to an aristocracy of
elders,

desirous of bestowing and resuming the sceptre by a free and frequent
election.-

the Koreish could never be reconciled to the proud pre-eminence of the line of

Hashem; the ancient discord of the tribes was rekindled; the fugitives of
Mecca

and the auxiliaries of Medina asserted their respective merits: and the rash
pro­

posal of choosing two independent caliphs would have crushed in their infancy
the

(1) Abnlfeda in Vit. Moham. p. 12,13.16,17. cum notij Gagnier.

(2) This outline of the Arabian history ij drawn from the Bibliotheque
Orientale of d'Herbelot; (under the

names of Aboubecre, Omar, Ottoman, Ali, See.) from the Annals of Abulfeda,
Abulpharagius. and Elmacin

(under the propei- years of the Hrgira,) and especially from Ockley's History
of the Saracens (vol. i. p. 1—1».

US—122. 229. 249. 363—372. 378—391. and almost the whole of the second
volume.) Yet we should welch with

caution the traditions of the hostile sects; a stream which becomes still more
muddy as it flows farther from the

source. Sir John Chardtn has too faithfully copied the fables and errors of
the modern Persians. (Voyages,

torn. 11. p. 235—250, &c.J '

(3) Ockley (at the end of his second volume) has given an English version of
one hundred and sixty-nine

sentences, which he ascribes, with some hesitation, to Ali, the son of Abu
Taleb. His preface is coloured by

the enthusiasm of a translator; yet these sentences delineate a
characteristic, though dark, picture of human

