THE DECLINE AND FALL

The appellation of great has been often bestowed and sometimes deserved, but

Charlemagne is the only prince in whose favour the title has been indissolubly

blended with the name. That name, with the addition of saint, is inserted in
the

Roman calendar; and the saint, by a rare felicity, is crowned with the praises
of

the historians and philosophers of an enlightened age.(l) His real merit is
doubt­

less enhanced by the barbarism of the nation and the times from which he
emerged;

but the afifiarent magnitude of an object is likewise enlarged by an unequal
com­

parison; and the ruins of Palmyra derive a casual splendour from the nakedness

of the surrounding desert. Without injustice to his fame, I may discern some

blemishes in the sanctity and greatness of the restorer of the western empire.
Of

his moral virtues, chastity is not the most conspicuous;(2) but the public
happiness

could not be materially injured by his nine wives or concubines, the various
indul­

gence of meaner or more transient amours, the multitude of his bastards whom

he bestowed on the church, and the long celibacy and licentious manners of his

daughters,(3) whom the father was suspected of loving with too fond a passion.

I shall be scarcely permitted to accuse the ambition of a conqueror; but in a
day

of equal retribution, the sons of his brother Carloman, the Merovingian
princes of

Aquitain, and the four thousand five hundred Saxons who were beheaded on the

same spot, would have something to allege against the justice and humanity of

Charlemagne. His treatment of the vanquished Saxons(4) was an abuse of the

right of conquest; his laws were not less sanguinary than his arms, and in the
dis-.

cussion of his motives whatever is subtracted from bigotry must be imputed to

temper. The sedentary reader is amazed by his incessant activity of mind and

body; and his subjects and enemies were not less astonished at his sudden pre­

sence, at the moment when they believed him at the most distant extremity of
the

empire; neither peace nor war, nor summer nor winter, were a season of repose:

and our fancy cannot easily reconcile the annals of his reign with the
geography

of his expeditions. But this activity was a national rather than a personal
virtue;

the vagrant life of a Frank was spent in the chase, in. pilgrimage, in
military ad­

ventures; and the journeys of Charlemagne were distinguished only by a more
nu­

merous train and a more important purpose. His military renown must be tried

by the scrutiny of his troops; his enemies, and his actions. Alexander
conquered

with the arms of Philip; but the two heroes who preceded Charlemagne, be­

queathed him their name, their examples, and the companions of their
victories.

At the head of his veteran and superior armies, he oppressed the savage or
dege­

nerate nations, who were incapable of confederating for their common safety:
nor

did he ever encounter an equal antagonist in numbers, in discipline, or in
arms.

The science of war has been lost and revived with the arts of peace; but his
cam­

paigns are not illustrated by any siege or battle of singular difficulty or
success; and

he might behold, with envy, the Saracen trophies of his grandfather. After his

Spanish expedition, his rear-guard was defeated in the Pyrenian mountains; and

the soldiers, whose situation was irretrievable, and whose valour was useless,

might accuse, with their last breath, the want of skill or caution of their
general. (5)

I touch with reverence the laws of Charlemagne, so highly applauded by a re­

spectable judge. They compose not a system, but a series, of occasional and
inl­

ander, (secul. u. dissert. I. p. 390—3g7.) Pagi, (torn. iii. p. 418.)
Muratori, (Annali dltalia, torn. vi. p. 339—

353.) Sigonius, (de Regno Italia, lib. iv.Opp. turn. ii. p. 247—251.)
Spanheim, (de Beta Translatione Imperii)

Giannone, (torn. i. p. 395—405.) St. Marc, (Abrege Chronologique, turn. i. p.
438-450.) Gaillard. (Hist, de

Charlemagne, lorn. ii. p. 386—146. Almost all these moderns have some
religious or national bias.

(1) By Mably, (Observations snr I'Histoire de France) Voltaire, (Histoire
Generale) Robertson, (History of

Charles V.) and Montesquieu. (Esprit des Loix, lib. xxxi. c. 18.) In the year
1782, M. Gaillard published ait

Histoire de Charlemagne, (in four vols, duodecimo) which I have freely and
profitably used. The author is

a man of sense and humanity: and his work is laboured with industry and
eloquence.' But I have likewise

examined the original monumenu of the reigns of Pepin and Charlemagne, in the
fifth volume of the histo­

rians of France.

(2) The vision of Weltin, composed by a monk, eleven years after the death of
Charlemagne, shows Mm in

Eurgatory.with a vulture who is perpetually gnawing the guilty member, while
the rest of his body, the em-

lem of his virtues, is sound and perfect. (See Gaillard, torn. ii. p.
317—360.)

(3) The marriage of Eginhard with Imma, daughter of Charlemagne, ii, in my
opinion, sufficiently refuted

by the probrum and tuipicio that sullied these fair damsels, without excepting
his own wife. (c. 19. p. 98—106,

cum Notts Schmincke.) The husband must have been loo strong for the historian.

(4) Besides the massacres and transmigrations, the pain of death was
pronounced against the fnllowiog

crimes. 1. The refusal of baptism. 2. The false pretence of baptism. 3. A
relapse to idolatry. 4. The mur­

der uf a priest or bishop. 5. Human sacrifices. 6. Eating meat in Lent. But
every crime might be eipiaffd

by baptism or penance; (Gaillard, torn. ii. p. 241—247.) and the Christian
Saxons became the friends aad

equal, of the Franks. (Stmv. Corpus Hist. Grrmanica-, p. 133.)

(5) In this action the famous Rutland, Rolando, Orlando, was slain—cum
pluribus all is. See the truth its

Eginhard, (e. ix. p. 51—56.) and the fable in an ingenious Supplement of M.
Gaillard. (torn. iii. p. 474.) The

Spaniards are too proud of a victory which history ascribes to the Gascons,
and romance to the Saracens.

