12 THE DECLINE AND FALL

were incessantly disturbed by the clamorous discontent of the greens; till the

twenty-second race, the emperor maintained his silent gravity; at length
yielding

to his impatience, he condescended to hold, in abrupt sentences, and by the
voice

of a crier, the most singular dialogue(l) that ever passed between a prince
and

his subjects. Their first complaints were respectful and modest; they accused
the

subordinate ministers of oppression, and proclaimed their wishes for the long
life

and victory of the emperor. " Be patient and attentive, ye insolent railers!"
ex­

claimed Justinian, "be mute, ye Jews, Samaritans, and Manich<cans !" The

greens still attempted to awaken his compassion. " We are poor, we are inno­

cent, we are injured, we dare not pass through the streets: a general
persecution

is exercised against our name and colour. Let us die, 0 emperor! but let us
die

by your command, and for your service!" But the repetition of partial and pas­

sionate invectives degraded, in their eyes, the majesty of the purple; they
re­

nounced allegiance to the prince who refused justice to his people; lamented
that

the father of Justinian had been born; and branded his son with the
opprobrious

names of a homicide, an ass, and a perjured tyrant. " Do you despise your
lives?"

cried the indignant monarch: the blues rose with fury from their seats; their
hos­

tile clamours thundered in the hippodrome; and their adversaries, deserting
the

unequal contest, spread terror and despair through the streets of
Constantinople.

At this dangerous moment, seven notorious assassins of both factions, who had

been condemned by the prefect, were carried round the city, and afterward

transported to the place of execution in the suburb of Pera. Four were imme­

diately beheaded; a fifth was hanged: but when the same punishment was in­

flicted on the remaining two, the rope broke, they fell alive to the ground,
the po­

pulace applauded their escape, and the monks of St. Conon, issuing from the

neighbouring convent, conveyed them in a boat to the sanctuary of the church.
(2)

As one of these criminals was of the blue, and the other of the green livery,
the

two factions were equally provoked by the cruelty of their oppressor, or the
in­

gratitude of their patron; and a short truce was concluded till they had
delivered

their prisoners, and satisfied their revenge. The palace of the Refect, who
with­

stood the seditious torrent, was instantly burnt, his officers and guards were
mas­

sacred, the prisons were forced open, and freedom was restored to those who
could

only use it for the public destruction. A military force, which had been des­

patched to the aid of the civil magistrate, was fiercely encountered by an
armed

multitude, whose numbers and boldness continually increased; and the Heruli,

the wildest barbarians in the service of the empire, overturned the priests
and

their relics, which from a pious motive, had been rashly interposed to
separate

the bloody conflict. The tumult was exasperated by this sacrilege, the people

fought with enthusiasm in the cause of God; the women from the roofs and win­

dows showered stones on the heads of the soldiers, who darted firebrands
against

the houses; and the various flames which had been kindled by the hands ot
citi­

zens and strangers, spread without control over the face of the city. The con­

flagration involved the cathedral of St. Sophia, the baths of Zeuxippus, a
part of

the palace from the first entrance to the altar of Mars", and the long portico
from

the palace to the forum of Constantine; a large hospital, with the sick
patients,

was consumed; many churches and stately edifices were destroyed, and an im­

mense treasure of gold and silver was either melted or lost. From such scenes

of horror and distress, the wise and wealthy citizens escaped over the
Bosphorus

to the Asiatic side; and, during five days, Constantinople was abandoned to
the

factions, whose watchword, Nika, vanquish! has given a name to this memorable

sedition. (3)

As long as the factions were divided, the triumphant blues and desponding

greens, appeared to behold with the same indifference the disorders of the
state-.

They agreed to censure the corrupt management of justice and the finance; and

the two responsible ministers, the artful Tribonian, and the rapacious John of
Cap-

padocia, were loudly arraigned as the authors of the public misery. The peace­

ful murmurs cf the people would have been disregarded; they were heard with

respect when the city was in flames; the questor, and the prefect, were
instantly

removed, and their offices were filled by two senators of blameless integrity.
Af-

(1) This dialogue, which Theophancs has preserved, exhibits the popular
language, as well as the manners

of Constantinople, in the seventh century. Their Greek is mingled with many
strange and barbarous words

for which Ducange cannot always find a meaning or etymology.

(2) See this church and monastery in Ducange C. P. Christians, lib. iv. p.
182.

(5) The history of the Nika sedition is extracted from Marcellinus (in
Chron.,) Procopius (Persic, lib. i. c.

26.0 John Malala (torn. ii. p. 213. e. us.,) Chron. Paschal, (p. 336—340.,)
Theophancs (Chronograph, p. 154 —

1J8.,) and ZonoMs (lib. xir. p. 61—63.)

