146 THE DECLINE AND FALL

pie interest was condemned by the clergy of the east and west:(l) but the
sense

of mutual benefit, which had triumphed over the laws of the republic, have re­

sisted, with equal firmness, the decrees of the church, and even the
prejudices of

mankind. (2)

3. Nature and society impose the strict obligation of repairing an injury; and

the sufferer by private injustice, acquires a personal right and a legitimate
action.

If the property of another be intrusted to our care, the requisite degree of
care

may rise and fall according to the benefit which we derive from such temporary

possession; we are seldom made responsible for inevitable accident, but the
con­

sequences of a voluntary fault must always be imputed to the author. (3) A Ro­

man pursued and recovered his stolen goods by a civil action of theft; they
might

pass through a succession of pure and innocent hands, but nothing less than a
pre­

scription of thirty years could extinguish his original claim. They were
restored

by the sentence of the pretor, and the injury was compensated by double, or
three­

fold, or even quadruple damages, as the deed had been perpetrated by secret

fraud or open rapine, as the robber had been surprised in the fact, or
detected by

a subsequent research. The Aquilian law(4) defended the living property of a

citizen, nis slaves and cattle, from the stroke of malice or negligence: the
highest ■

price was allowed that could be ascribed to the domestic animal at any moment
of

the year preceding his death, a similar latitude of thirty days was granted on
the

destruction of any other valuable effects. A personal injury is blunted or
sharp­

ened by the manners of the times and the sensibility of the individual: the
pain

or disgrace of a word or blow cannot easily be appreciated by a pecuniary
equi­

valent. The rude jurisprudence of the decemvirs had confounded all hasty
insults,

which did not amount to the fracture of a limb, by condemning the aggressor to

the common penalty of twenty-five asses. But the same denomination of money

was reduced, in three centuries, from a pound to the weight of half an ounce;
and

the insolence of a wealthy Roman indulged himself i» the cheap amusement of

breaking and satisfying the law of the twelve tables. Veratius ran through the

streets striking on the face the inoffensive passengers, and his attendant
purse-

bearer immediately silenced their clamours by the legal tender of twenty-five

pieces of copper, about the value of one shilling. (5) The equity of
thepretors

examined and estimated the distinct merits of each particular complaint. In
the

adjudication of civil damages, the magistrate assumed a right to consider the
va­

rious circumstances of time and place, of age and dignity, which may aggravate

the shame and sufferings of the injured person; but if he admitted the idea of
a

fine, a punishment, an example, he invaded the province, though, perhaps, he

supplied the defects, of the criminal law.

The execution of the Alban dictator, who was dismembered by eight horses, is

represented by Livy as the first and last instance of Roman cruelty in the
punish­

ment of the most atrocious crimes. (6) But this act of justice, or revenge,
was in^

flicted on a foreign enemy in the heat of victory, and at the command of a
single

man. The twelve tables afforded a more decisive proof of the national spirit,
since

they were framed by the wisest of the senate, and accepted by the free voices
of

the people; yet these laws, like the statutes of Draco,(7) are written in
characters

of blood.(8) They approve the inhuman and unequal principle of retaliation;
and

the forfeit of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a limb for a limb, is
rigorously

(1) The fathen are unanimous, (Barbeyrac, Morale des Peres, p. 144, fkc.)
Cyprian, Lactantius, Basil, Chry--

sostom (see his frivolous arguments in Noodt, lib. i. c. 7. p. 188.,) Gregory
of Nyssa, Ambrose, Jerome, Augus­

tus, ana a host of councils and casuists.

(2) Cato, Seneca, Plutarch, have loudly condemned the practice or abuse of
usury. According to the ety­

mology of foenus and toko;, the principal is supposed to generate the
interest: a breed of barren metal, ex­

claimed Shakspeare—and the stage is the echo of the public voice.

(3) Sir William Jones has given an ingenious and rational Essay on the Law of
Bailment. (London, 1781,

p. 127. in8vo.) He is perhaps the only lawyer equally conversant with the
year-books of Westminster, the

Commentaries of Ulpian, the Attic pleadings of Isseus, and the sentences of
Arabian and Persian cadhis.

(4) Noodt (Opp. torn. i. p. 137—172.) has composed a separate treatise, ad
Legem Aquiliam (Pandect, lib. ix.

tit. 2.)

(i) Aulus Gellius, (Noct. Attic, xx. 1.) borrowed his story from the
Commentaries of Q. Labeo on the twelve

tables.

(6) The narrative of Livy (1.28.) is weighty and solemn.' At tu dictis Albane
maneres is a harsh reflection,

unworthy of Virgil's humanity, (£neid. viii. 643.) Heyne, with his usual good
taste, observes that the subject

was too horrid for the shield of tineas, (torn. iii. p. 229.)

(7) The age of Draco (Olympiad, xxxix. 1.) is fixed by Sir John Marsham (Canon
Chronicus, p. 503—59ft.)

and Corsini (Fasti Attici. torn. iii. p. 62.) For his laws, see the writers on
the government of Athens, Sigo-

nius, Meursius, Potter, &c.

(8) The eighth, the deHctis, of the twelve tables is delineated by Gravina
(Opp. p. 292,293. with a Commen­

tary, p. 214—230s) Aulus Gellius, 20.1.) and the Collatio Legum Mosajcarum et
Romanarum afford much*

original information.

