OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

CHAPTER XLIV.

Idea of the Roman jurisprudence.—The laws of tlie kings.—The twelve tables of
tine de­

cemvirs.—The laws of the people.—The decrees of the senate.—The edicts of the
magis­

trates and emperors.—Authority of the civilians.—Code, pandects, novels, and
institutes,

of Justinian.—I. Rights of persons.—//. Rights of things.—///. Private
injuries and

actions IV. Crimes and punishments.

The vain titles of the victories of Justinian are crumbled into dust: but the
name

of the legislator is inscribed on a fair and everlasting monument. Under his
reign,

and by his care, the civil jurisprudence was digested in the immortal works of
the

Code, the Pandects, and the Institutes;(1) the public reason of the Romans

has been silently or studiously transfused into the domestic institutions of
Europe, (2)

and the laws of Justinian still command the respect or obedience of
independent

nations. Wise or fortunate is the prince who connects his own reputation with
the

honour and interest of a perpetual order of men. The defence of their founder
is

the first cause, which in every age has exercised the zeal and industry of the
civi­

lians. They piously commemorate his virtues; dissemble or deny his failings;
and

fiercely chastise the guilt or folly of the rebels who presume to sully the
majesty

of the purple. The idolatry of love has provoked, as it usually happens, the
ran­

cour of opposition: the character of Justinian has been exposed to the blind

vehemence of flattery and invective, and the injustice of a sect (the Anti-
Tri-

bonians) has refused all praise and merit to the prince, his ministers, and
his

laws. (3) Attached to no party, interested only for the truth and candour of
histo­

ry, and directed by the most temperate and skilful guides, (4) I enter with
just dif­

fidence on the subject of civil law, which has exhausted so many learned
lives, and

clothed the walls of such spacious libraries. In a single, if possible in a
short chap­

ter, I shall trace the Roman jurisprudence from Romulus to Justinian,(5)
appre­

ciate the labours of that emperor, and pause to contemplate the principles of
a

science so important to the peace and happiness of society. The laws of a
nation

form the most instructive portion of its history; and, although I have devoted
my­

self to write the annals of a declining monarchy, I shall embrace the occasion
to

breathe the pure and invigorating air of the republic.

The primitive government of Rome(6) was composed, with some political skill,

of an electiv e king, a council of nobles, and a general assembly of the
people. War

and religion were administered by the supreme magistrate; and he alone
proposed

the laws, which were debated in the senate, and finally ratified or rejected
by a

majority of votes in the thirty curie or parishes of the city. Romulus, Numa,
and

Servius Tullius, are celebrated as the most ancient legislators; and each of
them

claims his peculiar part in the threefold division of jurisprudence. (7) The
laws

(1) The civilians of the darker ages have established an absurd and
incomprehensible mode of quotation,

which is supported by authority and custom. In their references to the Code,
the Pandects, and the Insti­

tutes, they mention the number not of the book, but only of the law, and
content themselves with reciting the

first words of Che title to which it belongs; and of these titles there Hre
more than a thousand. Ludewig (Vit.

Justiniani, p. 268.) wishes to shake off this pedantic yoke; and I have dared
to adopt the simple and rational me­

thod of numbering the book, the title, and the law.

(8) Germany. Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, and Scotland, have received them as
common law or reason; in

France, Italy, &c. they possess a direet or indirect influence; and they were
respected in England, from Ste­

phen to Edward I. our national Justinian (Duck, de TJsu et Auctoritate Juris
Civilis, lib. ii. c. 1.8—15. Hein-

eccios, Hist. Joris Germanici, c. 3, 4. No. 55—124.,) and the legal historians
of each country.

(3) Francis Hottoman, a learned and acute lawyer of the sixteenth century,
wished to mortify Cu jacius, anet

to please the Chancellor de l'Hopital. His Anti-Tribonianus (which I have
never been able to procure) was

published in French in 1609: and his sect was propagated in Germany
(Heineccius, Opp. torn. iii. sylloge 3. p.

171—183.)

(4) At the head of these guides I shall respectfully place the learned and
perspicuous Heineccius, a German

professor, who died at Halle in the year 1741 (see his Eloge in the Nouvelle
Bihliotbeque Germaniqtie, torn. ii.

p.51—64.) His ample works have been collected in eight volumes in 4to. Geneva,
1743—1748. Thetreatisea

which I have separately used are, 1. Historia Juris Honiani et Germanici.
Lugd. Batav. 1740, in 8vo. 2. Syn­

tagma Antiquitatum Romanarn Jurisprudentiain illustramium, 2 vols, in 8vo.
Traject. ad Rhenum. 3. Ele-

menta Juris Civilis secundum Ordinem Institutionum, Lugd. Bat. 1751, in 8vo.
4. Elementa J. C. secundum

Ordinem Pandectarum, Traject. 1772, in 8vo. 2 vols.

(A) Our original text is a fragment de Origine Juris (Pandect, lib. i. tit 2.)
of Pomponius, a Roman lawyer*

who lived under the Antonines (Heinec. torn. iii. syll. 3. p. 66—126.) It has
been abridged, and probably cor­

rupted, by Tribonian, and since restored by Bynkershoek (Opp. torn. i. p.
279—304.)

(6) The constitutional history of the kings of Rome may be studied in the
first book of Livy, and more co­

piously in Dionysius Halicarnassensis (lib. ii.p. 80—96. 119—130. lib. iv. p.
198—220.,) who sometimes betrays

the character of a rhetorician and a Greek.

(7) This threefold division of the law was applied to the three Roman kings by
Justus Liptius (Opp. torn. ir.

