OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. in

TOented the austere duties which forbade him to partake the perils of their
spiritual

warfare. In less than two years he could announce to the archbishop of Alexan­

dria, that they had baptized the king of Kent with ten thousand of his Anglo-
Sax­

ons; and that the Roman missionaries, like those of the primitive church, were

armed only with spiritual and supernatural powers. The credulity or the pru­

dence of Gregory was always disposed to confirm the truths of religion by the
evi­

dence ef ghosts, miracles, and resurrectionsj(l) and posterity has paid to his
me­

mory the same tribute, which he freely granted to the virtue of his own or the

preceding generation. The celestial honours have been liberally bestowed by
the

authority of the popes; but Gregory is the last of their own order whom they
have

presumed to inscribe in the calendar of saints.

Their temporal power insensibly arose from the calamities of the times: and
the

Roman bishops, who have deluged Europe and Asia with blood, were compelled

to reign as the ministers of charity and peace. I. The church of Rome, as it
has

been formerly observed, was endowed with ample possessions in Italy, Sicily,
and

the more distant provinces; and her agents, who were frequently subdeacons,
had

acquired a civil and even criminal jurisdiction over their tenants and
husband­

men. _ The successor of St. Peter administered his patrimony with the temper

of a vigilant and moderate landlord;(2) and the epistles of Gregory are filled
with

salutary instructions to abstain from doubtful or vexatious lawsuits; to
preserve

the integrity of weights and measures; to grant eveiy reasonable delay, and to
re­

duce the capitation of the slaves of the glebe, who purchased the right of
mar­

riage by the payment of an arbitrary fine. (3) The rent or the produce of
these

estateswas transported to the mouth of the Tiber, at the risk and expense of
the

pope; in the use of wealth he acted like a faithful steward of the church and
the

poor, and liberally applied to their wants the inexhaustible resources of
abstinence

and order. The voluminous account of his receipts and disbursements was kept

above three hundred years in the Lateran, as the model of Christian economy.

On the four great festivals, he divided their quarterly allowance to the
clergy, to

his domestics, to the monasteries, the churches, the places of burial, the
alms­

houses, and the hospitals of Rome, and the rest of the diocess. On the first
day

of every month, he distributed to the poor, according to the season, their
stated

portion of corn, wine, cheese, vegetables, oil, fish, fresh provisions,
clothes, and

money; and his treasures were continually summoned to satisfy, in his name,
the

extraordinary demands of indigence and merit. The instant distress of the sick

and helpless, of strangers and pilgrims, was relieved by the bounty of each
day,

and of every hour; nor would the pontiff indulge himself in a frugal repast,
till he

had sent the dishes from his own table to some objects deserving of his
compas­

sion. The misery of the times had reduced the nobles and matrons of Rome to

accept, without ablush, the benevolence of the church: three thousand virgins

received their food and raiment from the hand of their benefactor; and many

bishops of Italy escaped from the barbarians to the hospitable threshold of
the

Vatican. Gregory might justly be styled the father of his country; and such
was

the extreme sensibility of his conscience, that, for the death of a beggar who
had

perished in the streets, he interdicted himself during several days from the
exer­

cise of sacerdotal functions. II. The misfortunes of Rome involved the
apostolic

pastor in the business of peace and war; and it might be doubtful to himself,
whether

piety or ambition prompted him to supply the place of his absent sovereign.

Gregory awakened the emperor from a long slumber, exposed the guilt or inca­

pacity of the exarch and his inferior ministers, complained that the veterans
were

withdrawn from Rome for the defence of Spoleto, encouraged the Italians to

guard their cities and altars, and condescended, in the crisis of danger to
name the

tribunes, and to direct the operations of the provincial troops. But the
martial

spirit of the pope was checked by the scruples of humanity and religion; the
im­

position of tribute, though it was employed in the Italian war, he freely
condemned

(0 A French critic (Petrui Gaiianvillinj. Opera, torn. ii. p. 105—118.) has
vindicated the right of Gregory

to the entire nonsense of the Dialognes. Diipin (torn. v. p. 138.) does not
think that any one will Touch Ibr

the truth of ail theie miracles; I should like to know how many of them he
believed himself.

(2) Baronius is unwilling to expatiate on the care of the patrimonies, lest he
should betray that they con­

sisted not of kingdoms, but farms. The French writers, the Benedictine editors
(torn. iv. lib. 3. p. 272, &c.,)

and Fleury (tnra. viii. p. 29. &r„) are not afraid of entering into these
humble, though useful details; and the

humanity of Fleury dwells on the social virtues of Gregory. , t

(3) I must suspect that this pecuniary fine on the marriages of villains
produced the famous, and often fa­

bulous right, de cuissage, de raarquette, &e. With the consent of her husband,
a handsome bride might com­

mute the payment in the arms of a young landlord, and the mutual favour might
afford a precedent of local

rather than legal tyraanv.

