OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

of a caliph, had signalized his valour in Egypt; and Zobeir(l) was the first
who

planted a scaling-ladder against the walls of Babylon. In the African war he
was

detached from the standard of Abdallah. On the news of the battle, Zobeir,
with

twelve companions, cut his way through the camp of the Greeks, and pressed
for­

ward, without either tastingfood or repose, to partake of the dangers of his
brethren.

He cast his eyes round the field. " Where," said he, " is our general?—In his

tent.—Is the tent a station for the general of the Moslems?" Abdallah
represented

with a blush the importance of his own life, and the temptation that was held
forth

by the Roman prefect. " Retort," said Zobeir, "on the infidels their
ungenerous

attempt Proclaim through the ranks, that the head of Gregory shall be repaid

with his captive daughter, and the equal sum of one hundred thousand pieces of

gold," To the courage and discretion of Zobeir the lieutenant of the caliph
in­

trusted the execution of his own stratagem, which inclined the long disputed
ba­

lance in favour of the Saracens. Supplying by activity and artifice the
deficiency

of numbers, a part of their forces lay concealed in their tents, while the
remainder

prolonged an irregular skirmish with the enemy, till the sun was high in the
hea­

vens. On both sides they retired with fainting steps: their horses were
unbridled,

their armour was laid aside, and the hostile nations prepared, or seemed to
pre­

pare, for the refreshment of the evening, and the encounter of the ensuing
day.

On a sudden the charge was sounded; the Arabian camp poured forth a swarm

of fresh and intrepid warriors; and the long line of the Greeks and Africans
was

surprised, assaulted, overturned, by new squadrons of the faithful, who, to
the

eye of fanaticism, might appear as a band of angels descending from the sky.

The prefect himself was slain by the hand of Zobeir: his daughter, who sought

revenge and death, was surrounded and «made prisoner; and the fugitives in­

volved in their disaster the town of Sufetula, to which they escaped from the

sabres and lances of the Arabs. Sufetula was built one hundred and fifty miles

to the south of Carthage; a gentle declivity is watered by a running stream,
and

shaded by a grove of juniper-trees; and in the ruins of a triumphal arch, a
porti­

co, and three temples of the Corinthian order, curiosity may yet admire the
mag­

nificence of the Romans. (2) After the fall of this opulent city, the
provincials and

barbarians implored on all sides the mercy of the conqueror. His vanity or his

zeal might be flattered by offers of tribute or professions of faith: but his
losses,

his fatigues, and the progress of an epidemical disease, prevented a solid
establish­

ment; and the Saracens, after a campaign of fifteen months, retreated to the
con­

fines of Egypt, with the captives and the wealth of their African expedition.
The

caliph's fifth was granted to a favourite, on the nominal payment of five
hundred

thousand pieces of gold;(3) but the state was doubly injured by this
fallacious

transaction, if each foot-soldier had shared one thousand, and each horseman
three

thousand, pieces, in the real division of the plunder. The author of the death
of

Gregory was expected to have claimed the most precious reward of the victory:

from his silence it might be presumed that he had fallen in the battle, till
the tears

and exclamations of the prefect's daughter at the sight of Zobeir revealed the

valour and modesty of that gallant soldier. The unfortunate virgin was
offered,

and almost rejected, as a slave, by her father's murderer, who coolly declared
that

his sword was consecrated to the service of religion; and that he laboured for
a

recompense far above the charms of mortal beauty, or the riches of this
transito­

ry life. A reward congenial to his temper, was the honourable commission of
an­

nouncing to the caliph Othman the success of his arms. The companions, the

chiefs, and the people, were assembled, in the mosch of Medina, to hear the
in­

teresting narrative of Zobeh-; and, as the or«tor forgot nothing except the
merit

of his own counsels and actions, the name of Abdallah was joined by the
Arabians

with the heroic names of Caled and Atnrou. (4)

The western conquests of the Saracens were suspended near twenty years, till

their dissensions were composed by the establishment of the house of Ommiyah:

(1) See in Ockley (Hist, of the Saracens, vn]. ii. p. 45.) the death of
Zobeir, which was honoured with the

tears of Ali, against whom he had rebelled. His valour at the siege of
Babylon, if indet*] it be the same person,

is mentioned by Eutychius. (Annal. torn. ii. p. 303.)

(2) Shaw's Travels,p. 118,119.

(3) Mimiea emptio, says Abulfeda, erat haac, et mira donatio; qtiandoquidem
Othman. ejus nomine numnios

cx serario prius ablatos aerario prsestabat. (Annal. Moslem, p. 78.) Elmacin
(in his cloudy version, p. 39.) seems

to report the same job. When the Arabs besieged the palace of Othman, it stood
high in their catalogue of

grievances.

(4; E5reTTpatT£uTo(p SapaxtjuSi ti)v A?pixjju )t«( rruftfiaXovTig Tte
T«p*'.'vui Tp)jyps(a) rcurov Tpssrsueri, lust Tons rrw atmu

KT6ivou<ri,xaM (rroix^vTsg ?°p5u; ^era twv &$?w u,TiTrpi^«v. Theophan.
Chronograph, p. 285. edit. Paris. His

chronology is loose and inaccurate.

Vol. III. 4S

