11 THE DECLINE AND FALL

III. That empire, after Home was barbarous, still embraced the nations whom

she had conquered beyond the Hadriatic, and as far as the frontiers of
Ethiopia

and Persia. Justinian reigned over sixty-four provinces, and nine hundred and

thirty-five cities;(l) his dominions were blessed by nature with the
advantages of

soil, situation, and climate; and the improvements of human art had been
perpe­

tually diffused along the coast of the Mediterranean and the banks of the
Nile,

from ancient Troy to the Egyptian Thebes. Abraham(2) had been relieved by

the well-known plenty of Egypt; the same country, a small and populous tract,

was still capable of exporting, each year, two hundred and sixty thousand
quarters-

of wheat for the use of Constantinople;(3) and the capital of Justinian was
sup­

plied with the manufactures of Sidon, fifteen centuries afterthey had been
celebrated

in the poems of Homer. (4) The annual powers of vegetation, instead of being

exhausted by two thousand harvests, were renewed and invigorated by skilful
hus­

bandly, rich manure, and seasonable repose. The breed of domestic animals was

infinitely multiplied. Plantations, buildings, and instruments of labour and
luxu­

ry, which are more durable than the term of human life, were accumulated by

the care of successive generations. Tradition preserved, and experience
simpli­

fied, the humble practice of the arts; society was enriched by the division of
la­

bour and the facility of exchange; and every Roman was lodged, clothed, and

subsisted by the industry of a thousand hands. The invention of the loom and

distaff has been piously ascribed to the gods. In every age, a variety of
animal

and vegetable productions, hair, skins, wool, flax, cotton, and at length
silk, have

been skilfully manufactured to hide or adorn the human body; they were stained

with an infusion of permanent colours; and the pencil was successfully
employed

to improve the labours of the loom. In the choice of those colours,(5) which
im­

itate the beauties of nature, the freedom of taste and fashion was indulged;
but

the deep purple, (6) which the Phoenicians extracted from a shell-fish, was
re­

strained to the sacred person and palace of the emperor; and the penalties of
trea­

son were denounced against the ambitious subjects, who dared to usurp the
prero­

gative of the throne. (7)

I need not explain that silk(8) is originally spun from the bowels of a
caterpillar,

and that it composes the golden tomb from whence a worm emerges in the form of

a butterfly. Till the reign of Iustinian, the silk worms, who feed on the
leaves of

the white mulberry tree, were confined to China; those of the pine, the oak,
and

the ash, were common in the forests both of Asia and Europe; but as their
educa­

tion is more difficult, and their produce more uncertain, they were generally
ne­

glected, except in the little island of Ceos, near the coast of Attica. A thin
gauze

was procured from their webs; and Cean manufacture, the invention of a woman,

for female use, was long admired both in the east and -at Rome. Whatever sus­

picions may be raised by the garments of the Medes and Assyrians, Virgil is
the

most ancient writer, who expressly mentions the soft wool which was combed

from the trees of the Seres or Chinese;(9) and this natural error, less
marvellous

thousand victims: and the tliirty-five thousand of Theophanes are swelled to
forty thousand by the more re­

cent Znnaras. Such is the usual progress of exaggeration.

(1) Hierocles, a cotemporary of Justinian, composed his Swfccguo; (Itineraria,
p. 631.,) or review of the east­

ern provinces and cities, before the year 535. (Wesseling in Pnefat. and Not.
ad p. 623, See.)

(2) See the book of Genesis (xii. 10.) and the administration of Joseph. 'Hie
annals of the Greeks and He­

brews agree in the early ai ts and plenty of Egypt: but this antiquity
supposes a long- series of improvements :

and Warburton, who is almost stifled by the Hebrew, calls aloud for the
Samaritan chronology. (Divine Le­

gation, vol. iii. p. 29, &c.)

(3) Eight millions of Uoman modii, besides a contribution of eighty thousand
auri, for the expenses of wa­

ter-carriage, from which the subject was graciously excused. See the
thirteenth edict of Justinian: the num­

bers are checked and verified by the agreement of the Greek and Latin texts.

(4) Homer's Iliad, vi. 289. These veils. smA.tt srapjrotxtiket, were the work
of the Sidoninn women, llut this

-passage is more honourable to the manufactures than to the navigation of Phoenicia, from whence they bad  
been imported to Troy in Phrygian bottoms.

(5) See in Ovid (de Arte Amandi, 3. 269, &c.) a poetical list of twelve
colours borrowed from flowers, the ele­

ments, Sec. But it is almost impossible to discriminate by words all the nice
and various shades both of art and

nature.

(6) By the discovery of cochineal, &c. we far surpass the colours of
antiquity. Their royal purple had a

strong smell, and a dark cast as deep as bull's blood.—Otiscuritas rnbens
(says Cassiodorus, Var. 1.2.) nigredo

aanguinea. The president Goguet (Origiiie des Loix, et des arts, part 2. lib.
ii. e. 2. p. 184—215.) will aniuss

and satisfy the reader. I doubt whether his book,especially in England, ii as
well known as it deserves to be.

(7) Historical proofs of this jealousy have been occasionally introduced, und
many more might have been

added; but the arbitrary acts of despotism were justified by the sober and
general declarations of law (Codex,

Theodosian. lib. x. tit. 21. leg. 3. Codex. Justinian, lib. xi. tit. 8. leg.
5.) An inglorious permission, and neces­

sary restriction, was applied to the mimcr., the female dancers (Cod. Theodos.
lib. xv. tit. 7. leg. 11.)

(8) In the history of insects (far more wonderful than Ovid's Metamorphoses)
the silk-worm holds a conspi­

cuous place. The bombyx of the isle of Ceos, as described by Pliny (Hist.
Natur. 11. 26,27. with the notes of

the two learned Jesuits, Hardolrin and Brotier,) may be illustrated by a
similar species in China (Memoires sur

les Chinois, torn. ii. p. 575—lis.:) but our silk-worm, as well as the white
mulberry tree, were unknown to

Theophrastus and Pliny.

(9) Gcorgic, 2.121. Sirica quando vencrint in mum pianissimo mm icioi suipicor
(amen in Julii Ctcsorn

