186 THE DECLINE AND FALL

Asia, and that the imperial purple should be the reward of diligence and s

A faint rumour of their undertaking was conveyed to the ears of Phocas, and
the

wife and mother of the young Heraclius were secured as hostages of his faith:
but

the treacherous art of Crispus extenuated the distant peril, the. means of
defence

were neglected or delayed, and the tyrant supinely slept till the African navy
cast

anchor in the Hellespont. Their standard was joined at Abidus by the fugitives

and exiles who thirsted for revenge; the ships of Heraclius, whose lofty masts

were adorned with the holy symbols of religion,(l) steered their triumphant
course

through the Propontis; and Phocas beheld from the windows of the palace, his
ap­

proaching and inevitable fate. The green faction was tempted by gifts and pro­

mises, to oppose a feeble and fruitless resistance to the landing of the
Africans;

but the people, and even the guards, were determined by the well-timed defec­

tion of Crispus; and the tyrant was seized by a private enemy, who boldly
invaded

the solitude of the palace. Stripped of the diadem and purple, clothed in a
vile

habit, and loaded with chains, he was transported in a small boat to the
imperial

galley of Heraclius, who reproached him with the crimes of his abominable
reign-

" Wilt thou govern better}" were the last words of the despair of Phocas. Af­

ter suffering each variety of insult and torture, his head was severed from
his

body, the mangled trunk was cast into the flames, and the same treatment was
in­

flicted on the statues of the vain usurper, and the seditious banner of the
green

faction. The voice of the clergy, the senate and the people, invited Heraclius
to

ascend the throne which he had purified from guilt and ignominy, after some

graceful hesitation, he yielded to their entreaties. His coronation was
accompa­

nied by that of his wife Eudoxia; and their posterity, till the fourth
generation,,

continued to reign over the empire of the east. The voyage of Heraclius had

been easy and prosperous, the tedious march of Nicetas was not accomplished
be­

fore the decision of the contest: but he submitted without a murmur to the
fortune

of his friend, and his laudable intentions were rewarded with an equestrian
statue,

and a daughter of the emperor. It was more difficult to trust the fidelity of
Cris­

pus, whose recent services were recompensed by the command of the Cappapo-

cian army. His arrogance soon provoked, and seemed to excuse the ingratitude

of his new sovereign. In the presence of the senate, the son-in-law of Phocas

was condemned to embrace the monastic life; and the sentence was justified by
the

weighty observation of Heraclius, that the man who had betrayed his father,
could:

never be faithful to his friend. (2)

Even after his death the public was afflicted by the crimes of Phocas, which

armed with a pious cause the most formidable of her enemies. According to the

friendly and equal forms of the Byzantine and Persian courts, he announced his

exaltation to the throne; and his ambassador Lilius, who had presented him
with

the heads of Maurice and his sons, was the best qualified to describe the
circum­

stances of the tragic scene.(3) However it might be varnished by fiction or

sophistry, Chosroes turned with horror from the assassin, imprisoned the pre­

tended envoy, disclaimed the usurper, and declared himself the avenger of his

father and benefactor. The sentiments of grief and resentment which humanity

would feel, and honour would dictate, promoted, on this occasion, the interest
of

the Persian king; and his interest was powerfully magnified by the national
and

religious prejudices of the magi and satraps. In a strain of artful adulation,
which

assumed the language of freedom, they presumed to censure the excess of his

gratitude and friendship for the Greeks; a nation with whom it was dangerous
to

conclude either peace or alliance; whose superstition was devoid of truth and
jus­

tice, and who must be incapable of any virtue, since they could perpetrate the

most atrocious of crimes, the impious murder of their sovereign. (4) For the

crime of an ambitious centurion, the nation which he oppressed was chastised
with

the calamities of war; and the same calamities, at the end of twenty years,
were

(1) According to Theophanes «iS»tw and fi«/nrrip»c. Cedrenut adds an
nxsipomiirrar eiismi too xupisa,

winch Heraclius bore as a banner in the first Persian expedition. See George
Pisid. Acroas 1. 140. The ma­

nufacture seems to have flourished ; but Foggini, the Roman editor (p. 26.,)
is at a loss to determine whether

this picture was an original or a copy. r

?LS<^}PVJ^py of Ph°ca» and the elevation of Heraclius, in Chron. Paschal, p.
380—38S. Theophanes,

P- 2,4.2~?S0- Nicephorus, jp. 3-7. Cedrenus, p. 404-407. Zonaraa, torn. ii.
lib. xiv. p. 80-82.

(4) Christians'nec pactum esse, nec fidemnec ftedns"" " 7quod7fufi™iMs^^^ non

occidissent. Eutych. Annalii, torn. ii. p. 211. yen. Fococl.

