232 THE DECLINE AND FALL

battle. His troops, under arms, were distributed through the streets; the
gates

of the cathedral were guarded, and a chosen band was stationed in the choir,
to

defend the person of their chief. He stood erect on his throne, and throwing
aside

the upper garment of a warrior, suddenly appeared before the eyes of the
multi­

tude in the robes of patriarch of Alexandria. Astonishment held them mute; but

no sooner had Apollmaris begun to read the tome of St Leo, than a volley of
curses,

and invectives, and stones, assaulted the odious minister of the emperor and
the

synod. A charge was instantly sounded by the successor of the apostles; the

soldiers waded to their knees in blood, and two hundred thousand Christians
are

said to have fallen by the sword; an incredible account, even if it be
extended from

the slaughter of a day to the eighteen years of the reign of Apollinaris. Two
suc­

ceeding patriarchs, Eulogius,(l) and John(2) laboured in the conversion of
heretics,

with arms and arguments more worthy of their evangelical profession. The theo­

logical knowledge of Eulogius was displayed in many a volume, which magnified

the errors of Eutyches and Severus, and attempted to reconcile the ambiguous
lan­

guage of St. Cyril with the orthodox creed of pope Leo and the fathers of
Chal-

cedon. The bounteous alms of John the eleemosynary were dictated by super­

stition, or benevolence, or policy. Seven thousand five hundred poor were
main­

tained at his expense; on his accession, he found eight thousand pounds of
gold

in the treasury ot the church; he collected ten thousand for the liberality of
the

faithful; yet the primate could boast in his testament, that he left behind
him no

more than the third part of the smallest of the silver coins. The churches of

Alexandria were delivered to the catholics, the religion of the Monophysites
was

proscribed in Egypt, and a law was revived, which excluded the natives from
the

honours and emoluments of the state.

A more important conquest still remained, of the patriarch, the oracle and
leader

of the Egyptian church. Theodosius had resisted the threats and promises of

Justinian with the spirit of an apostle or an enthusiast. " Such," (replied
the pa­

triarch,) "were the offers of the tempter when he showed the kingdoms of the

earth. But my soul is far dearer to me than life or dominion. Tfte churches
are

in the hands of a prince who can kill the body; but my conscience is my own;
and

in exile, poverty, or chains, I will steadfastly adhere to the faith of my
holy pre­

decessors, Athanasius, Cyril, and Dioscorus. Anathema to the tome of Leo and

the synod of Chalcedon! Anathema to all who embrace their creed! Anathema

to them now and for evermore! Naked came I out of my mother's womb, naked

shall I descend into the grave. Let those who love God, follow me and seek
their

salvation." After comforting his brethren, he embarked for Constantinople, and

sustained, in six successive interviews, the almost irresistible weight of the
royal

presence. His opinions were favourably entertained in the palace and the city;

the influence of Theodora assured him a safe conduct and honourable
dismission;

and he ended his days, though not on the throne, yet in the bosom of his
native

country. On the news of his death, Apollinaris indecently feasted the nobles
and

clergy; but his joy was checked by the intelligence of a new election; and
while

he enjoyed the wealth of Alexandria, his rivals reigned in the monasteries of
The-

bais, and were maintained by the voluntary oblations of the people. A
perpetual

succession of patriarchs arose from the ashes of Theodosius; and the Monophy-

site churches of Syria and Egypt were united by the name of Jacobites and the

communion of the faith. But the same faith, which has been confined to a nar­

row sect of the Syrians, was diffused over the mass of the Egyptian or Coptic
na­

tion; who, almost unanimously, rejected the decrees of the synod of Chalcedon.

A thousand years were now elapsed since Egypt had ceased to be a kingdom,
since

the conquerors of Asia and Europe had trampled on the ready necks of a people,

whose ancient wisdom and power ascend beyond the records of history. The con­

flict of zeal and persecution rekindled some sparks of their national spirit.
They

abjured, with a foreign heresy, the manners and language of the Greeks: every

Melchite, in their eyes, was a stranger, every Jacobite a citizen; the
alliance of

(1) Eulogius, who had been a monk of Antioch, «u more conspicuous for subtlety
than eloquence. He

proves that the enemies of the faith, the Gnianites and Thodosians, ought not
to be reconciled; that the same

proposition may be orthodox in the mouth of St. Cyril, heretical in that of
Severus; that the opposite asser­

tions of St. Leo arc equally true, Sec. His writings are no longer extant,
except, in the extracts of Photius,

who had perused them with care and satisfaction. Cod. 208.225—227. 230—280.

(2) See the life of John the eleemosynary by_ his cotemporary Leontius, bishop
of Neapolis in Cyprus, whose

Greek text, either lost or hidden, is reflected in the Latin version of
Baroniui, (A. D. 619. No. 9. A. D. 629.

No. 8.) Pagi, (Critica. tom.ii. p. 753.1 and Fabricius, (lib. v. c. 11. torn.
vii. p. 454.) hare made some critical oV

-serrations.

