ire THE DECLINE AND FALL

ings of the keys of his cities and the heads of his enemies. As soon as
Modair*

was freed from the presence of the usurper, the loyal inhabitants obeyed the
first

summons of Mebodes at the head of only two thousand horse, and Chosroes ac­

cepted the sacred and precious ornaments of the palace as the pledge of their

truth, and a presage of his approaching success. After the junction of the
impe­

rial troops, which Bahram vainly struggled to prevent, the contest was decided

by two battles on the banks of the Zab, and the confines of Media. The Romans,

with the faithful subjects of Persia, amounted to sixty thousand, while the
whole

force of the usurper did not exceed forty thousand men: the two generals
signa­

lized their valour and ability, but the victory was finally determined by the
pre­

valence of numbers and discipline. With the remnant of a broken army, Bah­

ram fled towards the eastern provinces of the Oxus: the enmity of Persia
recon­

ciled him to the Turks; but his days were shortened by poison, perhaps the
most

incurable of poisons; the stings of remorse and despair, and the bitter
remembrance

of lost glory. Yet the modern Persians still commemorate the exploits of
Bahram;

and some excellent laws have prolonged the duration of his troubled and
ti'ansi-

tory reign.

The restoration of Chosroes was celebrated with feasts and executions; and the

music of the royal banquet was often disturbed by the groans of dying or
mutilated

criminals. A general pardon might have diffused comfort and tranquillity
through

a country which had been shaken by the late revolutions; yet, before the
sangui­

nary temper of Chosroes is blamed, we should learn whether the Persians had
not

been accustomed either to dread the rigour, or to despise the weakness, of
their

sovereign. The revolt of Bahram, and the conspiracy of the satraps, were
impar­

tially punished by the revenge or justice of the conqueror; the merits of
Bindoes

himself could not purify his hand from the guilt of royal blood; and the son
of Hor-

mouz was desirous to assert his own innocence, and to vindicate the sanctity
of

kings. During the vigour of the Roman power, several princes were seated on
the

throne of Persia by the arms and the authority of the first Cassars. But their
new

subjects were soon disgusted with the vices or virtues which they had imbibed
in

a foreign land; the instability of their dominion gave birth to a vulgar
observation,

that the choice of Rome was solicited and rejected with equal ardour by the
capri-

eious levity of oriental slaves. £1) But the glory of Maurice was conspicuous
in the

long and fortunate reign of his son and his ally. A band of a thousand Romans,

who continued to guard the person of Chosroes, proclaimed its confidence in
the

fidelity of the strangers; his growing strength enabled him to dismiss his
unpopular

aid, but he steadily professed the same gratitude and reverence to bis adopted
fa­

ther; and till the death of Maurice, the peace and alliance of the two empires
were

faithfully maintained. Yet the mercenary friendship of the Roman prince had

been purchased with costly and important gifts: the strong cities of
Martyropolis

and Dara were restored, and the Persarmenians became the willing subjects of
an

empire, whose eastern limit was extended, beyond the example of her former

times, as far as the banks of the Araxes and the neighbourhood of the Caspian.

A pious hope was indulged, that the church, as well as the state, might
triumph

in this revolution; but if Chosroes had sincerely listened to the Christian
bishops,

the impression was erased by the zeal and eloquence of the Magi; if he was
armed

with philosophic indifference, he accommodated his belief, or rather his
profes­

sions, to the various circumstances of an exile and a sovereign. The imaginary

conversion of the king of Persia was.reduced to a local and superstitious
veneration

for Sergius,(2) one of the saints of Antioch, who heard his prayers and
appeared

to him in dreams; he enriched his shrine with offerings of gold and silver,
and as­

cribed to his invincible patron, the success of his arms, and the pregnancy of
Sira,

a devout Christian, and the best beloved of his wives. (3) The beauty of Sira
or

0) Experiment!! cogniturn est barharos malle Roma netere- reges quam habere.
These experiments are

admirably represented in the invitation, and expulsion of Vonones,(Annal. ii.
1—3.) Tiridates, (Annal. vii.

32—44.) and Meherdates, (Annal. xi. 10.12.10—14.) The eye of Tacitus seems to
have transpierced the camp*

of the Parthians and the walls of the haram.

(2) Sergius aad his companion Bacchus, who are said to have suffered in the
persecution of Maximian, ob­

tained divine honour in France, Italy Constantinople, and the east. Their tomb
at Rasaphe was famous for

miracles, and that Syrian town acquired the more honourable name of
Sergiopolis. Tiileinont, Mem. Eccles.

torn. v. p. 491—496. Butler's Saints, vol. 10. p. 155.

(3) Evagrius, (lib. vi. c. SI J and Theophylacr. lib. v. c. 13,14.) have
preserved the original letters of Chos­

roes, written in Greek, signed with bis own hand, and afterward inscribed on
crosses and tables of gold,

which were deposited in the church of Sergiopolis. They had been sent to the
bishop of Amiocb, as primate

