THE DECLINE AND FALL

Kinnisrin, or Chalcis, in Syria, as he was preparing to lead against
Constantinople

the remaining ferces of the east. The brother of Moslemah was succeeded by a

kinsman and an enemy; and the throne of an active and able prince was degraded

by the useless and pernicious virtues of a bigot. While he started and
satisfied

the scruples of a blind conscience, the siege was continued through the winter
by

the neglect rather than by the resolution of the caliph Omar.(l) The winter

proved uncommonly rigorous: above a hundred days the ground was covered with

deep snow, and the natives of the sultry climes of Egypt and Arabia lay torpid

and almost lifeless in their frozen camp. They revived on the return of
spring; a

second effort had been made in their favour; and their distress was relieved
by the

arrival of two numerous fleets, laden with corn, and arms, and soldiers; the
first

from Alexandria, of four hundred transports and galleys: the second of the
three

hundred and sixty vessels from the ports of Africa. But the Greek fires were

again kindled, and if the destruction was less complete, it was owing to the
expe­

rience which had taught the Moslems to remain at a safe distance, or to the
per­

fidy of the Egyptian mariners, who deserted with their ships to the emperor

of the Christians. The trade and navigation of the capital were restored; and

the produce of the fisheries supplied the wants, and even the luxury, of the
inha­

bitants. But the calamities of famine and disease were soon felt by the troops
of

Moslemah, and as the former was miserably assuaged, so the latter was dread­

fully propagated, by the pernicious nutriment which hunger compelled them to

extract from the most unclean or unnatural food. The spirit of conquest, and

even of enthusiasm, was extinct: the Saracens could no longer straggle beyond

their lines, either single or in small parties, without exposing themselves to
the

merciless retaliation of the Thracian peasants. An army of Bulgarians was at­

tracted from the Danube by the gifts and promises of Leo; and these savage
aux­

iliaries made some atonement for the evils which they had inflicted on the em­

pire, by the defeat and slaughter of twenty-two thousand Asiatics. A report
was

dexterously scattered, that the Franks, the unknown nations of the Latin
world,

were arming by sea and land in the defence of the Christian cause, and their
for­

midable aid was expected with far different sensations in the camp and city.
At

length, after a siege of thirteen months,(2) the hopeless Moslemah received
from

the caliph the welcome permission of retreat- The march of the Arabian cavalry

over the Hellespont, and through the provinces of Asia, was executed without
de­

lay or molestation; but an army of their brethren had been cut in pieces on
the

side of Bithynia, and the remains of the fleet were so repeatedly damaged by
tem­

pest and fire; that only five galleys entered the port of Alexandria to relate
the

tale of their various and almost incredible disasters. (3)

In the two sieges, the deliverance of Constantinople may be chiefly ascribed
to

the novelty, the terrors, and the real efficacy, of the GreekJire.{A) The
import­

ant secret of compounding and directing this artificial flame was imparted by
Calli-

nicus, a native of Heliopolis in Syria, who deserted from the service of the
caliph to

that of the emperor. (5) The skill of a chemist and engineer was equivalent to
the

succour of fleets and armies; and this discovery or improvement of the
military art

was fortunately reserved for the distressful period, when the degenerate
Romans of

the east were incapable of contending with the warlike enthusiasm and youthful

vigour of the Saracens. The historian who presumes to analyze this
extraordinary

venty pomegranates, a kid, six fowls, anil a huge quantity of the grapes of
Taycf. If the bill of fere be correct,

we must admire the appetite rather than the luxury of the sovereign of Asia.
(Abulfeda, Annal. Moslem, p.

126.)

(1) See the article of Omar Ben Abdalaziz. in the Bibliotheque Orientate, (p.
689,600.) prseferens, says Elma-

cin, (p. 91.) religionem suam rebus suis mundanis. He was so desirous of being
with God. that he would not

hare anointed his ear (his own saying) to obtain a perfect cure of his last
malady. The caliph had only one

shin, and in an age of luxury his annual expense was no more than two drachms.
(Abalpharagius, p. WO

Hand diu gayisus eo princi-ne tilit orbis Moslemus. (Abulfeda, p. 127.)

(2) Both Nicephorus and Theophanes agree, that the siege of Constantinople was
raised the fifteenth of Au­

gust: (A. D. 718.) but as the former, our best witness, affirms that it
continued thirteen months, the latter must

be mistaken in supposing that it began on the same day of the preceding year.
I do not think that Pagi has

remarked this inconsistency.

(3) In the second siege of Constantinople, I have followed Nicephorus, (Brer.
p. 33—50.) Theophanes,

(Chronograph, p. 321—334.) Cedrenus, (Compend. p. 449—452.) Zunar.is, (torn.
ii. p. 98—102.) Eimacin,

(Hist. Saracen, p. 88.) Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem, p. 126.) and Abulpharagius.
(Dynast, p. 130.) the most satis­

factory of the Arabs.

(4) Our sure and indefatigable guide in the middle ages and Byzantine History,
Charles du Fresne du Cange,

1ms treated in several places of the Greek fire, and his collections leave few
gleanings behind. See particularly

Glossar. Med. et Infim. Graeettar. p. 1275. sub voce llvp faiwrtov uypav,
Glossftr. Med. et lnfim. Latinitat. Iffflis

Grwcus. Observations sur Villehardonin, p. 305,306. Observations sur
Joinville, p. 71,72. °

(5) Theophanes s yies him *(xitIX™ (n. 295.) Cedrenus (p. 437.) brings this
artist from (the ruiits of) Hilit>-

pons in *.gyp>; and chemistry was indeed the peculiar science of the
Egyptians.

/ 1

