OF THE ROMAN EMMRE,

which each member possessed an undivided share of the civil and political
rights

of the community. In the more simple state of the Arabs, the nation is free,
be­

cause each of her sons disdains a base submission to the will of a master. His

breast is fortified with the austere virtues of courage, patience, and
sobriety; the

love of independence prompts him to exercise the habits of self-command; and

the fear of dishonour guards him from the meaner apprehensions of pain, of
dan­

ger, and of death. The gravity and firmness of the mind are conspicuous in his

outward demeanour: his speech is slow, weighty, and concise, he is seldom pro­

voked to laughter, his only gesture is that of stroking his beard, the
venerable

symbol of manhood; and the sense of his own importance teaches him to accost

his equals without levity, and his superiors without awe.(l) The liberty of
the

Saracens survived their conquest: the first caliphs indulged the bold and
familiar

language of their subjects: they ascended the pulpit to persuade and edify the
con­

gregation: nor was it before the seat of empire was removed to the Tigris,
that

the Abbassides adopted the proud and pompous ceremonial of the Persian and

Byzantine courts.

In the study of nations and men we may observe the causes that render them

hostile or friendly to each other, that tend to narrow or enlarge, to molify
or exas­

perate, the social character. The separation of the Arabs from the rest of
man­

kind, has accustomed them to confound the ideas of stranger and enemy; and the

poverty of the land has introduced a maxim of jurisprudence, which they
believe '

and practise to the present hour. They pretend, that in the division of the
earth,

the rich and fertile climates were assigned to the other branches of the human
fa­

mily; and that the posterity of the outlaw Ismael might recover by fraud or
force,

the portion of inheritance, of which he had been unjustly deprived. According

to the remark of Pliny, the Arabian tribes are equally addicted to theft and
mer­

chandise : the caravans that traverse the desert are ransomed or pillaged; and
their

neighbours, since the remote times of Job and Sesostris,(2) have been the
victims

of their rapacious spirit. If a Bedoween discovers from afar a solitary
traveller, he

rides furiously against him, crying with aloud voice, "Undress thyself, thy
aunt,

(my wife,) is without a garment." A ready submission entitled him to mercy;
resist­

ance will provoke the aggressor, and his own blood must expiate the blood
which

he presumes to shed in legitimate defence. A single robber, or a few
associates,

are branded with their genuine name; but the exploits of a numerous band as­

sume the character of a lawful and honourable war. The temper of a people thus

armed against mankind, was doubly inflamed by the domestic license of rapine,

murder, and revenge. In the constitution of Europe, the right of peace and war

is now confined to a small, and the actual exercise to a much smaller, list of
res­

pectable potentates; but each Arab, with impunity and renown, might point his

javelin against the life of his countryman. The union of the nation consisted
only

in a vague resemblance of language and manners; and in each community, the

jurisdiction of the magistrate was mute and impotent. Of the time of ignorance

which preceded Mahomet, seventeen hundred battles(3) are recorded by tradi­

tion: hostility was imbittered with the rancour of civil faction: and the
recital, in

prose or verse, of an obsolete feud, was sufficient to rekindle the same
passions

among the descendants of the hostile tribes. In private life, every man, at
least

every family, was the judge and avenger of his own cause. The nice sensibility

of honour, which weighs the insult rather than the injury, sheds its deadly
venom

on the quarrels of the Arabs: the honour of their women, and of their beards,
is

most easily wounded; an indecent action, a contemptuous word, can be expi­

ated only by the blood of the offender; and such is their patient inveteracy,
that

they expect whole months and years the opportunity of revenge. A fine or com-
'

pensation for murder is familiar to the barbarians of every age: but in Arabia
the

kinsman of the dead are at liberty to accept the atonement, or to exercise
with

their own hands the law of retaliation. The refined malice of the Arabs
refuses

(1) I mntt remind the reader, that d'Arvieux.d'Herbelot, and Niebuhr,
represent, in the most lively colours*

the manners and government of the Arabs, which are illustrated by many
incidental passages in the life of

Mahomet.

(2) Observe the first chapter of Job, and the long wall of one thousand five
hundred stadia which Sesostris

built from Pelusium to Heliopolis (Diodor. Sicul. torn. i. lib. i. p. 67.)
Under the name of Hycsot, the shepherd

kings, they had formerly subdued Egypt (Marsham, Canon. Chron. p. 98—163, &c.)

(3) Or, according to another account, one thousand two hundred (d'Herbelot.
Bibliotheque Orientate, p. 750

the two historians, who wrote of the Ayam at Arab, the battles of the Arabs,
lived in the ninth and tenth cen­

turies. The famous war of Dahes and Gabrah was occasioned by two horses,
lasted forty years, and ended in ft

proverb (Pococfc, Specimen, p. 48.)

