J5'l THE DECLINE AND FALL

of the ancients, may in a great measure be ascribed; but the advantages of the

soil and climate had been understood and cultivated since the reign of the
Mace­

donian kings. Before the invasion of the Saracens, Carizme, Bochara, and Sa-

marcand, were rich and populous under the yoke of the shepherds of the north.

These cities were surrounded with a double wall; and the exterior
fortification, of

a larger circumference, enclosed the fields and gardens of the adjacent
district.

The mutual wants of India and Europe were supplied by the diligence of the
Sog-

dian merchants; and the inestimable art of transforming linen into paper, has
been

diffused from the manufacture of Samarcand over the western world. (1)

II. No sooner had Abubeker restored the unity of faith and government, than

he despatched a circular letter to the Arabian tribes.—" In the name of the

most merciful God, to the rest of the true believers. Health and happiness,

and the mercy and blessing of God be upon you. I praise the most high God,

and I pray for his prophet Mahomet. This is to acquaint you, that I intend to

send the true believers into Syria(2) to take it out of the hands of the
infidels.

And I would have you know, that the fighting for religion is an act of
obedience to

God." His messengers returned with the tidings of pious and martial ardour

which they had kindled in every province; and the camp of Medina was suc­

cessively filled with the intrepid bands of the Saracens, who panted for
action,

complained of the heat of the season, and the scarcity of provisions; and
accused

with impatient murmurs the delays of the caliph. As soon as their numbers were

complete, Abubeker ascended the hill, reviewed the men, the horses, and the

arms, and poured forth a fervent prayer for the success of their undertaking.

In person and on foot, he accompanied the first day's march; and when the
blush­

ing leaders attempted to dismount, the caliph removed their scruples by a
decla­

ration, that those who rode, and those who walked in the service of religion,
were

equally meritorious. His instructions(3) to the chiefs of the Syrian army,
were

inspired by the warlike fanaticism which advances to seize, and affects to
despise,

the objects of worldly ambition. " Remember (said the successor of the
prophet)

that you are always in the presence of God, on the verge of death, in the
assu­

rance of judgment, and the hope of paradise. Avoid injustice and oppression;

consult with your brethren, and study to preserve the love and confidence of
your

troops. When you fight the battles of the Lord, acquit yourselves like men,

without turning your backs; but let not your victory be stained with the blood
of

women or children. Destroy no palm trees, nor burn any fields of corn. Cut

down no fruit trees, nor do any mischief to cattle, only such as you kill to
eat

When you make any covenant or article, stand to it, and be as good as your
word.

As you go on, you will find some religious persons who live retired in
monasteries,

and propose to themselves to serve God that way: let them alone, and neither
kill

them nor destroy their monasteries;(4) and you will find another sort of
people

that belong to the synagogue of Satan, who have shaven crowns;(5) be sure you

cleave their skulls, and give them no quarter till they either turn
Mahometans, or

pay tribute." All profane or frivolous conversation; all dangerous
recollection of

ancient quarrels, was severely prohibited among the Arabs: in the tumult of a

camp, the exercises of religion were assiduously practised: and the intervals
of

action were employed in prayer, meditation, and the study of the Koran. The

(1) A curious description of Samarcand is inserted in the Bibliotheca Arabico-
Hispana, torn. i. p. 208, &e.

The librarian Casiri (torn. ii. is.) relates, from credible testimony, that
paper was first imported from China to

Samarcand, A. H. 30, and tnieni«f, or rather introduced at Mecca, A. H. 88.
The escurial library contains

paper MSS. as old as the fourth or fifth century of the Hegira.

(2) A separate history of the conquest of Syria has been composed by Al
Wakidi, cadi of Bagdad, who vat

bom A. D. 748, and died A. D. 822; he likewise wrote the conquest of Egypt, of
Diarbekir, &e. Above the

meagre and recent chronicles of the Arabians, Al Wakidi has the double merit
of antiquity and copiousness.

His tales and traditions afford an artless picture of the men and the times.
Yet his narrative is too often defec­

tive, trifling, and imnrobable. Till something better shall be found, his
learned and spirited interpreter, (Oek-

ley, in bis History of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 21—342.) will not deserve the
petulant animadversion of Keitke.

(Prodidagmata ad Hajcji Chalifai Tabulas, p. 236.) I am sorry to think that
the labours of Ockley were con­

summated in a jail. (See his two prefaces to the first vol. A. D. 1708, to the
second, 1718, with the list of the '

authors at tbe end.)

(3) The instructions, Sec. of the Syrian war, are described by Al Wakidi and
Ockley, torn. i. p. 22—27. Sec.

In the sequel it is necessary to contract, and needless to quote, their
circumstantial narrative. My obligations

to others shall be noticed. •

(4) Notwithstanding this precept, M. Pauw (Recherches surles Egyptiens. tom.
ii. p. 192. edit. Lausanne)

represents the Bedoweens as the implacable enemies of the Christian monks. For
my own part, I am more in­

clined to suspect the avarice of the Arabian robbers, and the prejudices of
the German philosopher.

(5) Even in the seventeenth century, the monks were generally laymen; they
wore their hair long- and dis­

hevelled, and shaved their heads when they were ordained priests. The circular
tonsure was sttored and mys­

terious: it was the crown of thorns; but it was likewise n royal diadem, and
every priest was a king, esc. (Tbo-

mastin, Discipline de l'Eglise, tom. i. p. 721—758. especially p. 737, 738.)

