OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

'character of a divine ambassador: a German chieftain was transformed into the

Lord's anointed; and this Jewish rite has been diffused and maintained by the
su­

perstition and vanity of modern Europe. The Franks were absolved from their

ancient oath; but a dire anathema was thundered against them and their
posterity,

if they should dare to renew the same freedom of choice, or to elect a king,
except

in the holy and meritorious race of the Carlovingian princes. Without
apprehend­

ing the future danger, these princes gloried in their present security; the
secretary

of Charlemagne affirms, that the French sceptre was transferred by the
authority

of the popes;(l) and in their boldest enterprises, they insist, with
confidence, on

this signal and successful act of temporal jurisdiction.

II. In the change of manners and language, the patricians of Rome(2) were far

removed from the senate of Romulus, or the palace of Constantine, from the
free

nobles of the republic, or the fictitious parents of the emperor. After the
reco­

very of Italy and Africa by the arms of Justinian, the importance and danger
of

those remote provinces required the presence of a supreme magistrate; he was

indifferently styled the exarch or the patrician; and these governors of
Ravenna,

who fill their places in the chronology of princes, extended their
jurisdiction over

the Roman city. Since the revolt ot Italy and the loss of the exarchate, the
dis­

tress of the Romans had exacted some sacrifice of their independence. Yet,
even

in this act, they exercised the right of disposing of themselves; and the
decrees

of the senate and people successively invested Charles Martel and his
posterity

with the honours of patrician of Rome. The leaders of a powerful nation would

have disdained a servile title and subordinate office; but the reign of the
Greek

emperors was suspended; and, in the vacancy of the empire, they derived a more

glorious commission from the pope and the republic. The Roman ambassadors

presented these patricians with the keys of the shrine of St. Peter, as a
pledge

and symbol of sovereignty; with a holy banner, which it was their right and

duty to unfurl in the detence of the church and city. (3) In the time of
Charles

Martel and of Pepin, the interposition of the Lombard kingdom covered the
free­

dom, while it threatened the safety, of Rome; and the patriciate represented
only

the title, the service, the alliance, of these distant protectors. The power
and

policy of Charlemagne annihilated an enemy, and imposed a master. In his first

visit to the capital, he was received with all the honours which had formerly
been

paid to the exarch, the representative of the emperor: and these honours
obtained

some new decorations from'the joy and gratitude of Pope Hadrian I. (4) No
sooner

was he informed of the sudden approach of the monarch, than he despatched the

magistrates and nobles of Rome to meet him, with the banner about thirty miles

from the city. At the distance of one mile, the Flaminian way was lined with
the

schools, or national communities, of Greeks, Lombards, Saxons, &c.: the Roman

youth were under arms; and the children of a more tender age, with palms and

olive branches in their hands, chanted the praises of their great deliverer.
At the

aspect of the holy crosses, and ensigns of the saints, he dismounted from his
horse,

led the procession of his nobles to the Vatican, and, as he ascended the
stairs, de­

voutly kissed each step of the threshold of the apostles. In the portico,
Hadrian

expected him at the head of his clergy: they embraced, as friends and equals;

but in their march to the altar, the king or patrician assumed the right hand
of the

pope. Nor was the Frank content with these vain and empty demonstrations of

respect. In the twenty-six years that elapsed, between the conquest of Lombar-

dy and his imperial coronation, Rome, which had been delivered by the sword,

borrowed from the Latins in the last age of the empire. Constantine Manasses
mentions that of Charlemagne

as a foreign, Jewish, incomprehensible ceremony. See Seidell's Tilles of
Honour, in his Works, vol. iii. part i.

p. 234—249.

(0 See Eginhard, in Vita Caroli Magni, c. 1. p. S, See. c. 3. p. 24.
Cliildeiic was deposed—^ujjk, the Carlo­

vingian* were established—avctoritate, Pontifices Komani, Launoy, &c, pretend
that these strong words are

susceptible of a very soft interpretation. Be it so; yet £ginhard understood
the world, the court, and the La­

tin language.

(2) For the title and powers of patrician of Home, see Ducange, (Glo.s. Latin,
torn. v. p. 149—151.) Pagi.

(Critiea, A. I). 740. no. S—11.) Muratori, (Annali d'ltalia, torn. vi. p.
30H—329.) and St. Marc. (Abrege Chro-

nologique d'ltalie, torn. i. p. 379—382.) Of these the Franciscan Pagi is the
most disposed to make the patrii

cian a l-eutenant of the church, rather than of the empire.

(3) The papal advocates can soften the symbolic meaning of the banner and the
keys; hut the style of ad

regnwn ditnisimus, or direximus, (Codex Carolin. epist. i. torn. iii. pavsii.
p. 76.) seems to allow of no pallia-

lion or escape. In the MS. of the Vienna library, they read, instead of
regnwn^ rogum, prayer or request; (see

Ducange) and the royally of Charles Martel is subverted by this important
correction. (Catalini, in his Criti­

cal Prefaces Annali d'llalia, torn. xvii. p. 95—99.)

. (4) In the authentic narrative of this reception, the Liher Pontificalis
observes—obviam illi ejus sanctiras di-

ngens venerabiles crnces, id est stgna; sicut, mos est ad exarchum, ant
patiicium suscipiendum, cum cum fn-

ighenu honore suscipi ftcit. (font, iii, pais i. p. I8J0

