OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 16i

In comparing the proportion of the victorious and the vanquished people, the

change of language, will afford the most probable inference. According to this

standard it will appear, that the Lombards of Italy, and the Visigoths of
Spain,

were less numerous than the Franks or Burgundians; and the conquerors of Gaul

must yield, in their turn, to the multitude of Saxons, and Angles who almost
era­

dicated the idioms of Britain. The modem Italian has been insensibly formed by

the mixture of nations; the awkwardness of the barbarians in the nice manage­

ment of declensions and conjugations, reduced them to the use of articles and

auxiliary verbs; and many new ideas have been expressed by Teutonic appella­

tions. Yet the principal stock of technical and familiar words is found to be
of

Latin derivational) and if we were sufficiently conversant with the obsolete,
the

rustic, and the municipal dialects of ancient Italy, we should trace the
origin of

many terms which might, perhaps, be rejected by the classic purity of Rome.

A numerous army constitutes but a small nation, and the powers of the Lombards

were soon diminished by the retreat of twenty thousand Saxons, who scorned a

dependant situation, and returned, after many bold and perilous adventures, to

their native country.(2) The camp of Alboin was of formidable extent, but the

extent of a camp would be easily circumscribed within the limits of a city;
and

its martial inhabitants must be thinly scattered over the face of a large
country.

When Alboin descended from the Alps, he invested his nephew, the first duke of

Friuli, with the command of the province and the people; but the prudent
Gisulf

would have declined the dangerous office, unless he had been permitted to
choose,

among the nobles of the Lombards, a sufficient number of families(3) to form a

perpetual colony of soldiers and subjects. In the progress of conquest, the
same

option could not be granted to the dukes of Brescia and Bergamo, of Pavia or
Tu­

rin, of Spoleto or Beneventum; but each of these, and each of their
colleagues,

settled in his appointed district with a band of followers, who resorted to
his

standard in war, and his tribunal in peace. Their attachment was free and ho­

nourable: resigning the gifts and benefits which they had accepted, they might

emigrate with their families in the jurisdiction of another duke; but their
absence

from the kingdom was punished with death, as a crime of military desertion.
(4)

The posterity of the first conquerors struck a deeper root in the soil, which,
by

every motive of interest and honour, they were bound to defend. A Lombard

was born the soldier of his king and his duke; and the civil assemblies of the
na­

tion displayed the banners, and assumed the appellation, of a regular army. Of

this army, the pay and the rewards were drawn from the conquered provinces;

and the distribution, which was not effected till after the death of Alboin,
is dis­

graced by the foul marks of injustice and rapine. Many of the most wealthy

Italians were slain or banished; the remainder were divided among the
strangers,

and a tributary obligation was imposed (under the name of hospitality,) of
paying

to the Lombards a third part of the fruits of the earth. Within less than
seventy

vears, this artificial system was abolished by a more simple and solid tenure.
(5)

Either the Roman landlord was expelled by his strong and insolent guest; or
the

annual payment, a third of the produce, was exchanged by a more equitable

transaction for an adequate proportion of landed property. Under these foreign

masters, the business of agriculture, in the cultivation of corn, vines, and
olives,

was exercised with degenerate skill and industry, by the labour of the slaves
and

natives. But the occupations of a pastoral life were more pleasing to the
idleness

of the barbarians. In the rich meadows of Venetia, they restored and improved

the breed of horses for which that province had once been illustrious;(6) and
the

Title, torn. i. p. 374—387.) has followed the Warned Camillo Pelegrini in the
geography or the kingdom of

Naples. After the loss of the tmc Calabria, the rarity of the Greeks
substituted that name instend of the

more ignoble appellation of Bruttium; and the change appears to have take
place before the time of Charle­

magne, (Eginard, p. 75.)

(1) Maffli (Verona Illustrate, part i. p. 310—321.,) and Mtiratori, (Antiehita
Italiane, torn. ii. Dissertazione,

32,33. p. 71—365.) have asserted the native claims of the Italian idiom: the
former with enthusiasm, the lattet

with discretion: both with learning, ingenuity, and truth.

(2) Paul.de Gest. Langobard, lib. iii. c. 5—7.

(3) Paul, lib. ii. c. 9. He calls these families or generations by the
Teutonic name of Faras, which is like­

wise used in the Lombard laws. The humble deacon was not insensible of the
nobility of hit own race. See

lib. iv. c. 39.

(4) Compare No. 3 and 177 of the laws of Rotharis.

(5) Paul, lib. ii. c. 31,32. lib. iii. c. 16. The laws of Rotharis,
promulgated A. D. 643. do not contain the

smallest vestige of this payment of thirds; but they preserve many curious
circumstances of the state of Italy

and the manners of the Lombards.

(6) The studs of Dionysius of Syracuse, and his frequent victories in the
Olympic games, had diffused

among the Greets the fame of the Venetian horses; but the breed was extinct in
the time of Strabo flib. r. p­

