OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 1-7

infallible rule, the logic of Aristotle and the stoics, reduced particular
cases to ge­

neral principles, and diffused over the shapeless mass, the light of order and
elo­

quence. Cicero, his cotemporary and friend, declined the reputation of a pro­

fessed lawyer; but the jurisprudence of his country was adorned by his
incomparable

genius, which converts into gold every object that it touches. After the
example

of Plato, he composed a republic; and, for the use of his republic, a treatise
of

laws; in which he labours to deduce from a celestial origin, the wisdom and
jus­

tice of the Roman constitution. The whole universe, according to his sublime

hypothesis, forms one immense commonwealth: gods and men, who participate

of the same essence, are members of the same community; reason prescribes

the law of nature and nations; and all positive institutions, however modified
by

accident or custom, are drawn from the rule of right, which the Deity has in­

scribed on every virtuous mind. From these philosophical mysteries, he mildly

excludes the sceptics who refuse to believe, and the Epicureans who are
unwill­

ing to act. The latter disdain the care of the republic; he advises them to
slum­

ber in their shady gardens. But he humbly entreats that the new academy would

be silent, since her bold objections would too soon destroy the fair and well-
ordered

structure of his lofty system. (1) Plato, Aristotle, and Zeno, he represents
as the

only teachers who arm and instruct a citizen for the duties of social life. Of
these,

the armour of the stoics(2) was found to be of the firmest temper; and it was

chiefly worn, both for use and ornament, in the schools of jurisprudence. From

the portico, the Roman civilians learned to live, to reason, and to die: but
they

imbibed in some degree the prejudices of the sect; the love of paradox, the
perti­

nacious habits of dispute, and a minute attachment to words and verbal
distinc­

tions. The superiority of form to matter, was introduced to ascertain the
right

of property: and the equality of crimes is countenanced by an opinion of
Treba-

tius,(3) that he who touches the ear, touches the whole body; and that he who

steals from a heap of corn, or a hogshead of wine, is guilty of the entire
theft. (4)

Arms, eloquence, and the study of the civil law, promoted a citizen to the ho­

nours of the Roman state; and the three professions were sometimes more
conspi­

cuous by their union in the same character. In the composition of the jedict,
a

learned pretor gave a sanction and preference to his private sentiments: the
opi­

nion of a censor, or a consul, was entertained with respect: and a doubtful
inter­

pretation of the laws might be supported by the virtues or triumphs of the ci­

vilian. The patrician arts were long protected by the veil of mystery; and in

more enlightened times, the freedom of inquiry established the general
principles

of jurisprudence. Subtle and intricate cases were elucidated by the disputes
of

the forum; rules, axioms, and definitions,(5) were admitted as the genuine
dic­

tates of reason; and the consent of the legal professors was interwoven into
the

practice of the tribunals. But these interpreters could neither enact nor
execute

the laws of the republic; and the judges might disregard the authority of
Scxvo-

las themselves, which was often overthrown by the eloquence or sophistry of
ait

ingenious pleader.(6) Augustus and Tiberius were the first to adopt, as a
useful

engine, the science of the civilians; and their servile labours accommodated
the

old system to the spirit and views of despotism. Under the fair pretence of
se­

curing the dignity of the art, the privilege of subscribing legal and valid
opinions,

was confined to the sages of senatorian or equestrian rank, who had been
previ­

ously approved by the judgment of the prince; and this monopoly prevailed,
till

Hadrian restored the freedom of the profession to every citizen conscious of
his

abilities and knowledge. The discretion of the pretor was now governed by the

Servim Sulpicioi (in Bruto, c. 41. J whose praises are elegantly varied in Ihe
classic Latinity of the Roman

Gravina (p. 80.)

(1) Perturbatricem aatem omnium harum rerura academiam, banc ab Arcesila et
Cameade recentem, exo-

remits ut sileat, nam si invaserit in haec, quae satis scite instruct* et
composita videantur, nimis cdet ruinas,

quam quidein ego placare cupio, submovere non audeo (de Legibus, i. 13.) From
this passage alone Bentlcy

(Remarks on Free-thinking, p. 250.) might hare learned how firmly Cicero
believed in the specious doctrines

which he has adorned.

(2) The Stoic philosophy was first taught at Rome by Pansetius, the friend of
the younger Scipio (see his

life in the Mem. de V Academie ties Inscriptions, torn. x. p. 75—89.)

(3) As he is quoted by Ulpian (leg. 40. ad Sarbinnm in Pandect, lib. slvii.
tit. ii. leg. xxi.) Yet Trebatiui, af.

ter he was a leading civilian, qui familiam duxit, became an Epicurean (Cicero
ad Fam. 7. 5.) Perhaps he

was not constant or sincere in his new sect.

(4) See Gravina (p. 45.51.) and the ineffectual cavils of Maseou. Keineccius
(Hist. J. R. No. 125.) quotes,

mnd approves a dissertation of Everard Otto de Stoica Jurisconsultorum
Philosophia.

(I) We have heard of the Catonian rule, the Aquilian stipulation, and the
Manilian forms, of two hundrci

and eleven maxims, and of two hundred and forty-seven definition] (Pandect,
lib. i. tit. 16,17.)

(9) Read Cicero, lib. i. de Oratore, Topic*, pro Mareaa.

