OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 267

Ciesar, excited a conspiracy, and at length an insurrection, against her
odious step­

mother. The provinces were forgotten, the capital was in flames, and a century

of peace and order was overthrown in the vice and weakness of a few months. A

civil war was kindled in Constantinople; the two factions fought a bloody
battle in

the square of the palace, and the rebels sustained a regular siege in the
cathedral

of St. Sophia. The patriarch laboured with honest zeal to heal the wounds of

the republic, the most respectable patriots called aloud for a guardian and
avenger,

and every tongue repeated the praise of the talents and even the virtues of
An-

dronicus. In his retirement, he affected to revolve the solemn duties of his
oath.

" If the safety or honour of the imperial family be threatened, I will reveal
or op­

pose the mischief to the utmost in my power." His correspondence with the pa­

triarch and patricians was seasoned with apt quotations from the Psalms of
David

and the epistles of St. Paul; and he patiently waited till he was called to
her deli­

verance by the voice of his country. In his march from Oenoe to
Constantinople,

his slender train insensibly swelled to a crowd and an army; his professions
of re­

ligion and loyalty were mistaken for the language of his heart; and the
simplicity

of a foreign dress, which showed to advantage his majestic stature, displayed
a

lively image of his poverty and exile. All opposition sunk before him; he
reached '

the straits of the Thracian Bosphorus; the Byzantine navy sailed from the
harbour

to receive and transport the saviour of the empire; the torrent was loud and
irre­

sistible, and the insects, who basked in the sunshine of royal favour,
disappeared

at the blast of the storm. It was the first care of Andronicus to occupy the
pa­

lace, to salute the emperor, to confine his mother, to punish her minister,
and to

restore the public order and tranquillity. He then visited the sepulchre of
Ma­

nuel: the spectators were ordered to stand aloof, but, as he bowed in the
attitude

of prayer, they heard, or thought they heard, a murmur of triumph and revenge.

M I no longer fear thee, my old enemy, who hast driven me a vagabond to every

climate of the earth. Thou art safely deposited under a sevenfold dome, from

•whence thou canst never arise till the signal of the last trumpet. It is now
my

turn, and speedily will I trample on thy ashes and thy posterity." From his

subsequent tyranny we may impute such feelings to the man and the moment.

But it is not extremely probable that he gave an articulate sound to his
secret

thoughts. In the first months of his administration, his designs were veiled
by

a fair semblance of hypocrisy, which could delude only the eyes of the multi­

tude: the coronation of Alexius was performed with due solemnity, and his
perfi­

dious guardian, holding in his hands the body and blood of Christ, most
fervently

declared, that he lived, and was ready to die for the service of his beloved
pupil.

But his numerous adherents were instructed to maintain, that the sinking
empire

must perish in the hands of a child: that the Romans could only be saved by a
ve­

teran prince, bold in arms, skilful in policy, and taught to reign by the
long'expe-

rience of fortune and mankind; and that it was the duty of every citizen, to
force

the reluctant modesty of Andronicus to undertake the burden of the public
care.

The young emperor was himself constrained to join his voice to the general
accla­

mation, and to solicit the association of a colleague, who instantly degraded
him

from the supreme rank, secluded his person, and verified the rash declaration
of

the patriarch, that Alexius might be considered as dead, so soon as he was
com­

mitted to the custody of his guardian. But his death was preceded by the
impri­

sonment and the execution of his mother. After blackening her reputation, and

inflaming against her the passions of the multitude, the tyrant accused and
tried

the empress for a treasonable correspondence with the king of Hungary. His own

son, a youth of honour and humanity, avowed his abhorrence of this flagitious
act,

and three of the judges bad the merit of preferring their conscience to their
safety;

but the obsequious tribunal, without requiring any proof, or hearing any
defence,

condemned the widow of Manuel; and her unfortunate son subscribed the sentence

of her death. Maria was strangled, her corpse was buried in the sea, and her

memory was wounded by the insult most offensive to female vanity, a false and

ugly representation of her beauteous form. The fate of her son was not long
de­

ferred: he was strangled with a bow-string, and the tyrant, insensible to pity
or

remorse, after surveying the body of the innocent youth, struck it rudely with
his

foot:—" Thv father," he cried, " was a knave, thy mother a whore, and thyself
a

fool!"

The Roman sceptre the reward of his crimes, was held by Andronicus about three

years and a half, as the guardian or sovereign of the empire. His government

exhibited a singular contrast of vice and virtue. When he listened to his
jjaB­

