316 THE DECLINfc AND FALL

exempted him from shame or reproach, but he was reduced to a narrow circle of

existence, and deprived of those faithful mirrors, which reflect to our mind
the

minds of sages and heroes. Yet the book of nature and of man was open to his

view; and some fancy has been indulged in the political and philosophical
obser­

vations which are ascribed to the Arabian travelier.{t) He compares the
nations

and the religions of the earth; discovers the weakness of the Persian and
Roman

monarchies; beholds, with pity and indignation, the degeneracy of the times;
and

resolves to unite* under one God and one king) the invincible spirit and
primitive

virtues of the Arabs. Our more accurate inquiry will suggest, that instead of
vi*

siting the courts* the camps, the temples, of the east, the two journeys of
Maho­

met into Syria were confined to the fairs of Bostra and Damascus; that he was

only thirteen years of age when he accompanied the caravan of his uncle, and

that his duty compelled him to return as soon as he had disposed of the
merchan­

dise of Cadijah. In these hasty and superficial excursions, the eye of genius

might discern some objects invisible to his grosser companions; some seeds of

knowledge might be cast upon a fruitful soil: but his ignorance of the Syriac
lan­

guage must have checked his curiosity; and I cannot perceive in the life or
wri­

tings of Mahomet, that his prospect was far extended beyond the limits of the
Ara­

bian world. From every region of that solitary world, the pilgrims of Mecca

were annually assembled, by the calls of devotion and commerce: in the free
con­

course of multitudes, a simple citizen, in his native tongue, might study the
poli­

tical state and character of the tribes, the theory and practice of the Jews
and

Christians. Some useful strangers might be tempted or forced, to implore the

rights of hospitality; and the enemies of Mahomet have named the Jew, the Per­

sian, and the Syrian monk, whom they accuse of lending their secret aid to the

composition of the Koran. (2) Conversation enriches the understanding, but
soli­

tude is the school of genius; and the uniformity of a work denotes the hand of
a

single artist. From his earliest youth, Mahomet was addicted to religious
contem­

plation: each year, during the month of Ramadan, he withdrew from the world

and from the arms of Cadijah: in the cave of Hera, three miles from Mecca,(3)

he consulted the spirit of fraud or enthusiasm, whose abode is not in the
heavens,

but in the mind of the prophet. The faith which, under the name of Islam, he

preached to his family and nation, is compounded of an eternal truth, and a
ne­

cessary fiction, That there is only one God, AND that Mahomet is the

apostle of God.

It is the boast of the Jewish apologists, that while the learned nations of
anti­

quity were deluded by the fables of polytheism, their simple ancestors of
Pales­

tine preserved the knowledge and worship of the true God. The moral attri­

butes of Jehovah may not easily be reconciled with the standard of human
virtues

his metaphysical qualities are darkly expressed; but each page of the
Pentateuch

and the prophets is an evidence of his power: the unity of his name is
inscribed on

the first table of the law; and his sanctuary was never defiled by any visible
image of

the invisible essence. After the ruin of the temple, the faith of the Hebrew
exiles

was purified, fixed, and enlightened, by the spiritual devotion of the
synagogue;

and the authority of Mahomet will not justify his perpetual reproach, that the

Jews of Mecca or Medina adored Ezra as the son of God. (4) But the children of

Israel had ceased to be a people; and the religions of the world were guilty,
at

least in the eyes of the prophet, of giving sons, or daughters* or companions,
to

the supreme God. In the rude idolatry of the Arabs, the crime is manifest and

audacious: the Sabians arc poorly excused by the pre-eminence of the first
planet,

tlie mask: nor ran any conclusion be drawn from ihe words of disease and
delirium. The lettered youth, before

he aspired to the prophetic character, must have often excrcised.in private
life, the arts of reading and writing,

and his first converts of his own family, would have been the ftrR to detect
and upbraid his scandalous hypo­

crisy. (White's Sermons, p. 203, 204. Notes, p. 36—38.)

(1) The count de Boulainvillers (Vie de Mahomed, p. 202—228.) leads his
Arabian pupil, like the Telemachtis

of Fenelon, or the Cyrus of Ramsay. His journey to the court of Prrsia is
probably a fiction; nor can I trace the

origin of his exclamation," Les Grecs sont pourtant des hommes." The two
Syrian journeys are expressed by

almost all the Arabian writers both Mahometans and Christians. (Gagnier, ad
Abulfed. p. 10.)

(2) I am not at leisure to pursue the fables or conjectures which name the
strangers accused or suspected by

the infidels of Mecca. (Koran, c. 16. p. 223. c. 55. p. 297. with Sale's
Remarks. Pndeaus's Life of Mahomet, p.

22—27. Gagnier, Not. ad Abulfed. p. 11. 74. Maracci, torn. ii. p. 400.) JXven
Prideaux has observed that the

transaction must have been secret, and that the scene lay in the heart of
Arabia.

(3) Abulfeda, in Vit. e. 7. p. 1 i. Gagnier, torn. i. p. 133. 133. The
situation of mount Hera is remarked by

Abulfeda. (Geograph. Arab. p. 4.) Yet Mahomet had never read of the cave of
Egcria, ubi nocturnse Numa

constituebat amicte, of the Idsean mount where Minos conversed with Jove, &c.

(4) Koran, c. 9. p. 153* Al Beidawi, and the other commentators quoted by
Sale, adhere to the charge; bat t

do not understand that it is coloured by the most obscure or absurd tradition
of the Talmudists.

