238 • THE DECLINE AND FALL

\

Libanus. John Maron, one of the most learned and popular of the monks, as­

sumed the character of patriarch of Antiooh; his nephew Abraham, at the head

of the Maronites, defended their civil and religious freedom against the
tyrants of

the east. The son of the orthodox Constantino pursued, with pious hatred, a

people of soldiers, who might have stood the bulwark of his empire against the

common foes of Christ and of Rome. An army of Greeks invaded Syria; the

monastery of St. Maron was destroyed with fire; the bravest chieftains were
be­

trayed and murdered, and twelve thousand of their followers were transplanted
to

the distant frontiers of Armenia and Thrace. Yet the humble nation of the Ma­

ronites has survived the empire of Constantinople, and they still enjoy under
their

Turkish masters, a free religion, and a mitigated servitude. Their domestic
go­

vernors are chosen among the ancient nobility; the patriarch, in his monastery
of

( Canobin, still fancies himself on the throne of Antioch; nine bishops
compose his

synod, and one hundred and fifty priests, who retain the liberty of marriage,
are

intrusted with the care of one hundred thousand souls. Their country extends

from the ridge of mount Libanus to the shores of Tripoli; and the gradual
descent

affords, in a narrow space, each variety of soil and climate, from the Holy
Cedars,

erect under the weight of snow,(l) to the vine, the mulberry, and the olive
trees

of the fruitful valley. In the twelfth century, the Maronites, abjuring the
Mono-

thelite error, were reconciled to the Latin churches of Antioch and Rome, (2)

and the same alliance has been frequently renewed by the ambition of the popes

and the distress of the Syrians. But it may reasonably be questioned, whether

their union has ever been perfect or sincere; and the learned Maronites of the

college of Rome havei vainly laboured to absolve their ancestors from the
guilt of

heresy and schism. (3)

IV. Since the age of Constantine, the Armenians(4) had signalized their at­

tachment to the religion and empire of the Christian's. The disorders of their

country, and their ignorance of the Greek tongue, prevented their clergy from
as­

sisting at the synod of Chalcedon, and they floated eighty-four years,(5) in a
state

of indifference or suspense, till their vacant faith was finally occupied by
the mis­

sionaries of Julian of Halicarnassus,(6) who, in Egypt, their common exile,
had

been vanquished by the arguments or the influence of his rival Severus, the
Mo-

nephysite patriarch of Antioch. The Armenians alone are the pure disciples of

Eutyches, an unfortunate parent, who has been renounced by the greater part of

his spiritual progeny. They alone persevere in the opinion, that the manhood
of

Christ was created, or existed without creation, of a divine and incorruptible
sub­

stance. Their adversaries reproach them with the adoration of a phantom; and

they retort the accusation, by deriding or execrating the blasphemy of the
Jaco­

bites, who impute to the Godhead the vile infirmities of the flesh, even the
natu­

ral effects of nutrition and digestion. The religion of Armenia could not
derive

much glory from the learning or the power of its inhabitants. The royalty-

expired with the origin of their schism; and their Christian kings, who arose

and fell in the thirteenth century on the confines of Cilicia, were the
clients of the

Latins and the vassals of the Turkish sultan of Iconium. The helpless nation
has

(1) In the last century twenty large cedars still remained, (Voyage de la
Roque, torn. i. p. 68—76.) at present

they are reduced to four or five. (Volney, torn. i. p. 264.) These trees so
famous in Scripture, were guarded,

by excommunication; the wood was sparingly borrowed for small crosses, &c. an
annual mass was chanted un­

der their shade; and they were endowed by the Syrians with a sensitive power
of erecting their branches to re­

pel the snow, to which Mount Libanus is less faithful than it is painted by
Tacitus; inter ardores opaeum fiduui-

que nivibus—a daring metaphor! (Hist. 5,6.)

(2) The evidence of William of Tyre (Hist. iirGestis Dei per Francos, lib.
xxii. c. S. p. 1022.) is copied or con­

firmed by Jacques de Vitra. (Hist. Hierosolym. lib. ii. c. 77. p. 1093, 1094.)
But this unnatural league expired

with the power of the Fianks;and Abnlpharagius (who died in 12S6) considers
the Maronites as a sect of Mo-

nothelites. (Bibliot. Orient, torn. ii. p. 292.)

.(3) I find a description and history of the Maronites in the Voyage de la
Syrie et du Mont Liban par la

Roque. (2 vols, in 12mo. Amsterdam, 1723, particularly torn. i. p. 42—47. p.
174—184. torn. ii. p. 10—120.) Ill

the ancient part, he copies the prejudices of the Nairon and the other
Maronites at Rome, which Assemannus

is afraid to renounce, and ashamed to support. Jablonski, (Instilut. Hist.
Christ, tom.iii. p. 186.) Nkhuhr,

(Voyage de 1'Arabie, &c. torn. ii. p. 346. 370—381.) and, above all, the
judicious Volney, (Voyage en F.gypte et

en Syne, torn. ii. p. 8—31. Paris, 17870 may be consulted.

-(4) The religion of the Armenians is briefly described by La Croze. (Hist, du Christ, de 1'Ethiope et de  
I'Armeme, p. 269—402.) He refers to the great Armenian History of Galanus, 3
vols, in folio, Rome, 1650—

1661.) and commends the stale of Armenia in the third volume of the Nouveanx
Mcmoires des Missions dn

Levant. The work of a Jesuit must have sterling merit when it is praised by La
Croze.

(5) The schism of the Armenians is placed eighty-four years after the council
of Chalcedon. (Pagi. Critics,

ad A. D. 535.) It was consummated at the end of sev«nteen years; and it is
from the year of Christ 552 that

we date the era of the Armenians. (PArt de verifier les Dates, p.35.)

(6) The sentiments and success of Julian of Halicaniassus may be seen in
Liberatus, (Brev. c. 19.) Renau-

dot, (Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 132.-303.) and Aoemannui. (Bibliot. Orient,
tott. ii. DJswoat. de Mwrophysiiej,

