62 THE DECLINE AND FALL

prayers and pilgrimage of Datius, bishop of Milan, were not without effect;
and

he obtained one thousand Thracians and Isaurians, to assist the revolt of
Liguria

against her Arian tyrant. At the same time, John the Sanguinary,(1) the nephew

of Vitalian, was detached with two thousand chosen horse, first to Alba on the

Fucine lake, and afterward to the frontiers of Picenum on the Hadriatic sea. "
la

• that province," said Belisarius, " the Goths have deposited their families
and trea­

sures without a guard or the suspicion of danger. Doubtless they will violate
the

truce; let them feel your presence, before they hear of your motions. Spare
the

Italians; suffer not any fortified places to remain hostile in your rear; and
faithfully

reserve the spoil for an equal and common partition. It would not be
reasonable (he

added with a laugh,) that whilst we are toiling to the destruction of the
drones, our

more fortunate brethren should rifle and enjoy the honey."

The whole nation of the Ostrogoths had been assembled for the attack, and was

almost entirely consumed in the siege of Rome. If any credit be due to an
intelli­

gent spectator, one-third at least of their enormous host was destroyed, in
frequent

and bloody combats under the walls of the city. The bad fame and pernicious

qualities of the summer air, might already be imputed to the decay of
agriculture

and population; and the evils of famine and pestilence were aggravated by
their

own licentiousness, and the unfriendly disposition of the country. While
Vitiges

struggled with his fortune; while he hesitated between shame and ruin, his
retreat

was hastened by domestic alarms. The king of the Goths was informed by trem­

bling messengers, that John the Sanguinary spread the devastations of war from

the Apennine to the Hadriatic; that the rich spoils and innumerable captives
of

Picenum were lodged in the fortifications of Rimini; and that this formidable
chief

had defeated his uncle, insulted his capital, and seduced, by secret
correspondence,

the fidelity of his wife, the imperious daughter of Amalasontha. Yet, before
her

retired, Vitiges made a last effort either to storm or to surprise the city. A
secret

passage was discovered in one of the aqueducts; two citizens of the Vatican
were

tempted by bribes to intoxicate the guards of the Aurelian gate; an attack was

meditated on the walls beyond the Tiber, in a place which was not fortified
with,

towers; and the barbarians advanced, with torches and scaling-ladders, to the
as­

sault of the Pincian gate. But every attempt was defeated by the intrepid
vigi­

lance of Belisarius, and his band of veterans, who, in the most perilous
moments,

did not regret the absence of their companions; and the Goths, alike destitute
of

hope and subsistence, clamorously urged their departure, before the truce
should

expire, and the Roman cavalry should again be united. One year and nine days

after the commencement of the siege, an army so lately strong and triumphant,

burnt their tents, and tumultuously repassed the Milvian bridge. They repassed

not with impunity: their thronging multitudes, oppressed in a narrow passage,

were driven headlong into the Tiber by their own fears and the pursuit of the
ene­

my; and the Roman general, sallying from the Pincian gate, inflicted a severe
and

disgraceful wound on their retreat. The slow length of a sickly and desponding

host was heavily dragged along the Flaminian way; from whence the barbarians

were sometimes compelled to deviate, lest they should encounter the hostile
garri­

sons that guarded the high road to Rimini and Ravenna. Yet so powerful was
this

flying army, that Vitiges spared ten thousand men for the defence of the
cities

which he was most solicitous to preserve, and detached his nephew Uraias, with

an adequate force, for the chastisement of rebellious Milan. At the head of
his

principal army, he besieged Rimini, only thirty-three miles distant from the
Go­

thic capital. A feeble rampart, and a shallow ditch, were maintained by the
skill

and valour of John the Sanguinary, who shared the danger and fatigue of the
mean­

est soldier, and emulated, on a theatre less illustrious, the military virtues
of his

great commander. The towers and battering engines of the barbarians were ren­

dered useless; their attacks were repulsed; and the tedious blockade, which
re­

duced the garrison to the last extremity of hunger, afforded time for the
union and

march of the Roman forces. A fleet which had surprised Ancona, sailed along

the coast of the Hadriatic, to the relief of the besieged city. The eunuch
Narses

landed in Picenum with two thousand Heruli, and five thousand of the bravest

troops of the east. The rock of the Appennine was forced; ten thousand
veterans

moved round the foot of the mountains, under the command of Belisarius
himself;

and a new army, whose encampment blazed with innumerable lights, afifieared^to

advance along the Flaminian way. Overwhelmed with astonishment and despair,

0) Anastasias (p, 49.) has preserved this rpithct of SMieuinaiius, which might
do honour to a tiger.

