OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

. prophetess, they attacked the invaders with an enthusiasm similar to their
own.

The veteran bands of Hassan were inadequate to the defence of Africa: the con­

quests of an age were lost in a single dayfand the Arabian chief, overwhelmed
by

the torrents, retired to the confines of'Egypt, and expected, five years, the
pro­

mised succours of the caliph. After the retreat of the Saracens, the
victorious

prophetess assembled the Moorish chiefs, and recommended a measure of strange

and savage policy. " Our cities," said she, " and the gold and silver which
they

contain, perpetually attract the arms of the Arabs. These vile metals are not
the

objects of our ambition; we content ourselves with the simple productions of
the

earth. Let us destroy these cities; let us bury in their ruins those
pernicious trea­

sures; and when the avarice of our foes shall be destitute of temptation,
perhaps

they will cease to disturb the tranquillity of a warlike people." The proposal
was

accepted with unanimous applause. From Tangier to Tripoli, the buildings,

or at least the fortifications, were demolished, the fruit trees were cut
down, the

means of subsistence were extirpated, a fertile and populous garden was
changed

into a desert, and the historians of a more recent period could discern the
frequent

traces of the prosperity and devastation of their ancestors. Such is the tale
of the

modern Arabians. Yet I strongly suspect that their ignorance of antiquity, the

love of the marvellous, and the fashion of extolling the philosophy of
barbarians,

has induced them to describe, as one voluntary act, the calamities of three
hun­

dred years, since the first fury of the Donatists and Vandals. In the progress
of

the revolt, Cahina had most probably contributed her share of destruction; and
the

alarm of universal ruin might terrify and alienate the cities that had
reluctantly

yielded to her unworthy yoke. They no longer hoped, perhaps they no longer

wished, the return of their Byzantine sovereigns:. their present servitude was
not

alleviated by the benefits of order and justice; and the most zealous catholic
must

prefer the imperfect truths of the Koran to the blind and rude idolatry of the

Moors. The general of the Saracens was again received as the saviour of the
pro­

vince; the friends of civil society conspired against the savages of the land;
and the

royal prophetess was slain in the first battle which overturned the baseless
fabric

of her superstition and empire. The same spirit survived under the successor
of

Hassan; it was finally quelled by the activity of Musa and his two sons, but
the

number of the rebels may be presumed from that of three hundred thousand cap­

tives; sixty thousand of whom, the caliph's fifth, were sold for the profit of
the

public treasury. Thirty thousand of the barbarian youth were enlisted in the

troops; and the pious labours of Musa to inculcate the knowledge and practice
of

. the Koran, accustomed the Africans to obey the apostle of God and the
command­

er of the faithful. In their climate and government, their diet and
habitation, the

wandering Moors resembled the Bedoweens of the desert. With the religion, they

were proud to adopt the language, name, and origin of Arabs: the blood of the

strangers and natives was insensibly mingled; and from the Euphrates to the
Atlan­

tic the same nation might seem to be diffused over the sandy plains of Asia
and

Africa. Yet I will not deny that fifty thousand tents of pure'Arabians might
be

transported over the Nile, and scattered through the Libyan desert; and I am
not

ignurant that five of the Moorish tribes still retain their barbarous idiom,
with the

appellation and character of ivhite Africans. (1)

V. In the progress of conquest from the north and south, the Goths and the Sa­

racens encountered each other on the confines of Europe and Africa. In the
opi­

nion of the latter the difference of religion is a reasonable ground of
enmity, and

warfare. (2) As early as the time of Othman,(3) their piratical squadrons had

ravaged the coasts of Andalusia;(4) nor had they forgotten the relief of Car­

thage by the Gothic succours. In that age, as well as in the present, the
kings

of Spain were possessed of the fortress of Ceuta; one of the columns of Hercu­

les, which is divided by a narrow strait from the opposite pillar or point of
Eu-

(1) The first book of Leo Afrieanus. and the observations of Dr. Shaw, (p.
220.223,227.247, &c.) will throw

some light on the roving tribes of Barbary, of Arabian,or Moorish descent. But
Shaw had seen these savages

with distant terror; and Leo, a captive in the Vatican, appears to have lost
more of his Arabic than he conld

acquire of Greek or Roman learning. Many of his gross mistakes might be
detected in the first period of the

Mahometan history.

(2) In a conference with a prince of the Greeks, Amrou observed that their
religion was different; upoa

which score it was lawful for brothers to quarrel. Ockley's History of the
Saracens, vol. i. p. 328.

(3) Abulfeda, Anna). Moslem, p. 78. vers. Reiske.

(4) The name of Andalusia is applied by the Arabs not only to the modem
province, but to the whole penin­

sula of Spain. (Geograph. Nub. p. 151. D'Heraelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 114,
115.) The etymology has been

most improbably deduced from Vandalusia, country of the Vandals. (D'Anville,
Etats de 1'Europe, p. 146,

147» &e.j But the Handalusia of Casiri. which signifies in Arabic, the region
of the evening, of the west, in •

word, the Hesperia of the Greeks is perfectly opposite, (Bibliot. Arabico-
Hispana, torn. ii. p. 327, tic.)

