OF THE ROMAK EMPIRE; 50J

the west:f 1) to his person the title of majesty was long appropriated; and he
dis­

puted with the pope the sublime prerogative of creating kings and assembling

councils. The oracle of the civil law, the learned Bartolus, was a pensioner
of

Charles IV. and his school resounded with the doctrine, that the Roman emperor

wasthe rightful sovereign of the earth, from the rising to the setting sun.
The

contrary opinion was condemned, not as an error, but as a heresy; since even
the

gospel had pronounced, " And there went forth a decree from Csesar Augustus

that all the world should be taxed. "(2)

If we annihilate the interval of time and space between Augustus and Charles,

strong and striking will be the contrast between the two Caesars; the
Bohemian,

who concealed his weakness under the mask of ostentation, and the Roman, who

disguised his strength under the semblance of modesty. At the head of his
victo­

rious legions, in his reign over the sea and land, from the Nile and Euphrates
to

the Atlantic ocean, Augustus professed himself the servant of the state and
the

equal of his fellow-citizens. The conqueror of Rome and her provinces assumed

the popular and legal forms of a censor, a consul, and a tribune. His will was

the law of mankind, but in the declaration of his laws he borrowed the voice
of

the senate and people; and, from their decrees, their master accepted and
renewed

his temporary commission to administer to the republic. In his dress, his
domes­

tics, (3) his titles, in all the offices of social life, Augustus maintained
the character

of a private Roman: and his most artful flatterers respected the secret of his
ab­

solute and perpetual monarchy.

CHAPTER L.

Description of Arabia and its inhabitants.—Birth, character, and doctrine, of
Mahomet.—

Hepreaches at Mecca.—Flies to Medina.—Propagates his religion by the
sword.—Vo­

luntary or reluctant submission of the Arabs.—His death and successors.—The
claims

and fortunes of Ali and his descendants.

After pursuing above six hundred years the fleeting Caesars of Constantinople

and Germany, I now descend, in the reign of Heraclius, on the eastern borders
of

the Greek monarchy. While the state was exhausted by the Persian war, and

the church was distracted by the Nestorian and Monophysite sects, Mahomet,

with the sword in one hand and the Koran in the other, erected his throne on
the

ruins of Christianity and of Rome. The genius of the Arabian prophet, the man­

ners of his nation, and the spirit of his religion, involve the causes of the
decline

and fall of the eastern empire; and our eyes are curiously intent on one of
the most

memorable revolutions which have impressed a new and lasting character on the

nations of the globe. (4)

In the vacant space between Persia, Syria, Egypt, and Ethiopia, the Arabian

peninsula,(5) may be conceived as a triangle of spacious but irregular
dimensions,

(1) The republic of Europe, with the pope and emperor at its heads, was never
represented with more dig­

nity than in the council of Constance. See Lenfant's History of that assembly.

(2) Gravina, Origines Juris Civilis, p. 108.

(3) Six thousand ums have been discovered of the slaves and freednten of
Augustus and Livia. So minute

was the division of office, that one slave was appointed to weigh the wool
which was spnn by the empress's

maids, another for the care of her lap dog, &c (Camere Sepoichrale, &o. by
Bianchini. Extract of his work,

in the Bibliotheque Italique, torn. iv. p. 175. His Eloge, by Fontenelle,
torn. vi. p. 356.)- But these servants.

wers>of the same rank, and possibly not more numerous than those of Follio or
Lentulus. They only prove

the general riches of the city.

(4) As in this and the following chapter I shall display much Arabic learning.
1 must profess my total igno­

rance of the oriental tongues, and my gratitude to the learned interpreters,
who have transfused their science

into the Latin, French, and English languages. Their collections, versions,
and histories, I shall occasionally

notice.

(5) The geographers of Arabia may be divided into three classes.—1. The Greeks
and Latins, whose pro­

gressive knowledge may be traced in Agathareides, (di Mari Rubro. in Hudson.
Geograph. Minor, torn, i.) Di-

odorus Siculus, (torn. i. lib. ii. p. 159—167. lib. iii. p. 211—216. edit.
Wesseling) Strabo, (lib. xvi. p. 1112—1114.

from Eratosthenes, p. 1122—1132. from Artemidoras) Dionysius, (Periegesis,
927—960.) Pliny, (Hist. Natnr. 5,

12.6.32.) and Ptolemy. (Descript. et Tabulae Urbium, in Hudson, torn. Mi.) 2.
The Arabic writers, who have

treated the subject with the zeal of patriotism or devotion: the extracts of
Pocock (Specimen Hist. Arabura,

p. 125—128.) from the Geography or the Sherif al Edrissi, render us still more
dissatisfied with the version or

abridgment (p. 24—27.44—56. 108, 8cc. 119, &c) which the Maronttes have
published under the absurd title of

Gcographia Nubiensis; (Paris, 1619.) but the Latin and French translators,
Graves, (in Hudson, torn, iii.) and

Gallant], (Voyage de la Palestine par la Roque, p. 265—346.) have opened to us
the Arabic of Abulfeda, the

most copious and correct account of the peninsula, which may be enriched,
however, from the Bibliotheque

Orientate of D'Herbelot, p. 120. et alibi passim. S. The European travellers,
among whom Shaw (p. 438—455.)

and Niebuhr, (Description, 1773, Voyages, torn. i. 1776.) deserve an
honourable distinction: Busching (Geo.

graphie par Bcringer, torn. viii. p. 416-^510.) has eompilcd wi(h judgment;
and d'AnvillCs Maps (Ortm Vete.

