OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 333

Sea, the ocean, and the gulf of Persia, were saluted by the acclamations of a

faithful people; and the ambassadors who knelt before the throne of Medina,
were

as numerous (says the Arabian proverb) as the dates that fall from the
maturity of

a palm tree. The nation submitted to the God and the sceptre of Mahomet; the

opprobrious name of tribute was abolished, the spontaneous or reluctant obla­

tions of alms and tithes were applied to the service of religion; and one hun­

dred and fourteen thousand Moslems accompanied the last pilgrimage of the

apostle. (1)

When Heraclius returned in triumph from the Persian war, he entertained, at

Erhesa, one of the ambassadors of Mahomet, who invited the princes and na­

tions of the earth to the profession of Islam. On this foundation the zeal of
the

Arabians has supposed the secret conversion of the Christian emperor: the
vanity

of the Greeks has feigned a personal visit to the prince of Medina, who
accepted

from the royal bounty a rich domain, and a secure retreat in the province of
Sy­

ria.^) But the friendship of Heraclius and Mahomet were of short continuance;

the new religion had inflamed rather than assuaged the.rapacious spirit of the
Sa­

racens; and the murder of an envoy afforded a decent pretence for invading,
with

three thousand soldiers, the territory of Palestine, that extends to the
eastward of

the Jordan. The holy banner was intrusted to Zeid; and such was the discipline

or enthusiasm of the rising sect, that the noblest chiefs served without
reluctance

under the slave of the prophet. On the event of his decease, Jaafar and Abdal-

lah were successively substituted to the command; and if the three should pe­

rish in the war, the troops were authorized to elect their general. The three

leaders were slain in the battle of Muta,(3) the first military action which
tried

the valour of the Moslems against a foreign enemy. Zeid fell, like a soldier,
in

the foremost ranks; the death of Jaafar was heroic and memorable; he lost his

right hand; he shifted the standard to his left; the left was severed from his
body;

he embraced the standard with his bleeding stumps, till he was transfixed to
the

ground with fifty honourable wounds. " Advance," cried Abdallah, who stepped

into the vacant place, " advance with confidence; either victory or paradise
is our

own." The lance of a Roman decided the alternative; but the falling standard

was rescued by Caled, the proselyte of Mecca: nine swords were broken in his

hand; and his valour withstood and repulsed the superior numbers of the Chris­

tians. In the nocturnal council of the camp he was chosen to command: his
skil­

ful evolutions of the ensuing day secured either the victory or the retreat of
the

Saracens: and Caled is renowned among his brethren and his enemies, by the
glo­

rious appellation of \he Sword of God. In the pulpit, Mahomet described, with

prophetic rapture, the crowns of the blessed martyrs; but in private he
betrayed

the feelings of human nature: he was surprised as he wept over the daughter of

Zeid. " What do I see ?" said the astonished votary. " You see," replied the

apostle, "a friend who is deploring the loss of his most faithful friend."
After

the conquest of Mecca, the sovereign of Arabia affected to prevent the hostile
pre­

parations of Heraclius; and solemnly proclaimed war against the Romans,
without

attempting to disguise the hardships and dangers of the enterprise. (4) The
Mos­

lems were discouraged: they alleged the want of money, or horses, or
provisions;

the season of harvest, and the intolerable heat of the summer: " Hell is much
hot­

ter," said the indignant prophet. He disdained to compel their service; but on
his

return he admonished the most guilty, by an excommunication of fifty days.
Their

desertion enhanced the merit of Abubeker, Othman, and the faithful companions

who devoted their lives and fortunes; and Mahomet displayed his banner at the

head of ten thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot. Painful indeed was the

distress of the march: lassitude and thirst were aggravated by the scorching
and

pestilential winds of the desert: ten men rode by turns on the same camel; and

they were reduced to the shameful necessity of drinking the water from the
belly

of that useful animal. In the midway, ten days' journey from Medina and Da-

(1) The last conquest and pilgrimage of Mahomet are contained in Abulfeda(p.
121—133.,) Gagnier (torn,

iii. p. 119—219.,) Elmacin (p. 10,11.,) Abulpharagius. (p. 103.) The ninth of
the Hegira was styled the Year

of Embassies (Gagnier, Not. ad Abulfed. p. 121.)

(2) Compare the bigoted Al Jannabi (apod Gagnier, torn. i. p. 232—25S.) with
the no less bigoted Greeks,

Th*ophanes,(p.276—278.) Zonaras (torn. li. lib. 14. p. 86.) and Cedrenus. (p.
421.)

(3) For the battle of Muta, and its consequences, see Abnlfeda (p. 100—102.)
and Gagnier (torn. ii. p. 327—

343.) KstXtSo; (says Theophanes) ov KiyivTt nxyjiiftav tow ©5Cu.

(4) The expedition to Tabac is recorded by our ordinary historians, Abnlfeda
(Vit. Moham. p. 123—127.) and

Oaenier (Vie de Mahomet, torn. iii. p. 147—163.;) but we have the advantage of
appealing to the original evi­

dence of the Koran (e. ix. p. 154—165.,) with Sale's learned and rational
notes.

