OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.- 185

to himself. Without assuming the office of a prince, he renounced the
profession

of a soldier; and the reign of Phocas afflicted Europe with ignominious peace,
and

Asia with desolating war. His savage temper was inflamed by passion, hardened

by fear, exasperated by resistance or reproach. The flight of Theodosius to
the

Persian court had been intercepted by a rapid pursuit, or a deceitful message:
he

was beheaded at Nice, and the last hours of the young prince were soothed by
the

comforts of religion and the consciousness of innocence. Yet his phantom dis­

turbed the repose of the usurper: a whisper was circulated through the east,
that

the son of Maurice was still alive: the people expected their avenger, and the

widow and daughter of the late emperor would have adopted as their son and

brother the vilest of mankind. In the massacre of the imperial family,(l) the

mercy, or rather the discretion, of Phocas, had spared these unhappy females,

and they were decently confined to a private house. But the spirit of the
empress

Constantina, still mindful of her father, her husband, and her sons, aspired
to

freedom and revenge. At the dead of the night, she escaped to the sanctuary of

St. Sophia; but her tears, and the gold of her associate Germanus, were
insuffi­

cient to provoke an insurrection. Her life was forfeited to revenge, and even
to

justice: but the patriarch obtained and pledged an oath for her safety; a
monastery

was allotted for her prison, and the widow of Maurice accepted and abused the
le­

nity of his assassin. The discovery or the suspicion of a second conspiracy,
dis­

solved the engagements and rekindled the fury of Phocas. A matron who com­

manded the respect and pity of mankind, the daughter, wife, and mother of em­

perors, was tortured like the vilest malefactor, to force a confession of her
designs

and associates; and the empress Constantina, with three innocent daughters,
was

beheaded at Chalcedon, on the same ground which had been stained with the

blood of her husband and five sons. After such an example, it would be super­

fluous to enumerate the names and sufferings of meaner victims. Their condem­

nation was seldom preceded by the forms of trial, and their punishment was im-

bittered by the refinements of cruelty: their eyes were pierced, their tongues
were

torn from the root, their hands and teet were amputated; some expired under
the

lash, others in the flames, others again were transfixed with arrows; and a
simple

speedy death was mercy which they could rarely obtain. The hippodrome, the

sacred asylum of the pleasures and the liberty of the Romans, was polluted
with

heads and limbs and mangled bodies; and the companions of Phocas were the most

sensible, that neither his favour, nor their services, could protect them from
a

tyrant, the worthy rival of the Caligulas and Domitians of the first age of
the

empire. (2)

A daughter of Phocas, his only child, was given in marriage to the patrician

Crispus,(3) and the royal images of the bride and bridegroom were indiscreetly

placed in the circus by the side of the emperor. The father must desire that
his

posterity should inherit the fruit of his crimes, but the monarch was offended
by

this premature and popular association: the tribunes of the green faction, who
ac­

cused the officious error of their sculptors, were condemned to instant death:
their

lives were granted to the prayers of the people; but Crispus might reasonably

doubt whether a jealous usurper could forget and pardon his involuntary compe­

tition. The green faction was alienated by the ingratitude of Phocas and the
loss

of their privileges; every province of the empire was ripe for rebellion; and
He-

raclius, exarch of Africa, persisted above two years in refusing all tribute
and

obedience to the centurion who disgraced the throne of Constantinople. By the

secret emissaries of Crispus and the senate, the independent exarch was
solicited

to save and to govern his country: but his ambition was chilled by age, and he
re­

signed the dangerous enterprise to his son Heraclius, and to Nicetas, the son
of

Gregory his friend and lieutenant. The powers of Africa were armed by the two

adventurous youths; they agreed that the one should navigate the fleet from
Car­

thage to Constantinople, that the other should lead an army through Egypt and

CD The family of Maurice ii represented hy Ducange: (Familial Byzantinoe, p.
106—10B.) his elileit son

Theodosins had been crowned emperor when he wai no more than four years and a
half old, and he 11 always

joined with his father in the salutations of Gregory. With the Christian
daughters, Anaslasia and Theocteste,

I am surprised to find the pagan name of Cleopatra. „„..,-

(2) Some of the cruelties of Phocas are marked by Theophylact, lib. Tin. c.
13—15. George of Pisidia, the

poet of Heraclius, styles him (Bell. Avarieum, p. 46. Rome, 1777.) t»; ™»™.Jo;
o SvrxaSix-ns «m iS'Of iofi S**ur.

The latter epithet is just—but the corrupter of life was easily vanquished.

(3) In the writers, and in the copies of those writers, there is such
hesitation between the names of Priscus

and Crispus (Dacange, Fam. Byzant. p. 111.,) that I have been tempted to
identify the son-in-law of Phocas

with die hero five times victorious over the Avars.

Vol.. III. 21

