THE DECLINE AND FALL

CHAPTER XLVIII.

Flan of the remainder of the work.—Succession and characters of the Greek
emperors of

Constantinople, from the time of Heraclius to the Latin conquest.

I have now deduced from Trajan to Constantine, from Constantine to Hera­

clius, the regular series of the Roman emperors; and faithfully exposed the
pros­

perous and adverse fortunes of their reigns. Five centuries of the decline and
fall

6f the empire have already elapsed; but a period of more than eight hundred

years still separates me from the term of my labours, the taking of
Constantinople

by the Turks. Should I persevere in the same course, should I observe the same

measure, a prolix and slender thread would be spun through many a volume, nor

would the patient reader find an adequate reward of instruction or amusement.

At every step as we sink deeper in the decline and fall of the eastern empire,
the

annals of each succeeding reign would impose a more ungrateful and melancholy

task. These annals must continue to repeat a tedious and uniform tale of weak­

ness and misery; the natural connexion of causes and events would be broken by

frequent and hasty transitions, and a minute accumulation of circumstances
must

destroy the light and effect of those general pictures which compose the use
and

ornament of a remote history. From the time of Heraclius, the Byzantine thea­

tre is contracted and darkened: the line of empire, which had ,been defined by

the laws of Justinian and the arms of Belisarius, recedes on all sides from
our view:

the Roman name, the proper subject of our inquiries, is reduced to a narrow
cor­

ner of Europe, to the lonely suburbs of Constantinople; and the fate of the
Greek

empire has been compared to that of the Rhine, which loses itself in the
sands,

before its waters can mingle with the ocean. The scale of dominion, is dimi­

nished to our view by the distance of time and place: nor is the loss of
external

splendour compensated by the nobler gifts of virtue and genius. In the last
mo-

4 ments of her decay, Constantinople was doubtless more opulent and populous
than

Athens at her most flourishing era, when a scanty sum ot six thousand talents,
or

twelve hundred thousand pounds sterling, was possessed by twenty-one thousand

male citizens of an adult age. But each of these citizens was a freeman who
dared

to assert the liberty of his thoughts, words, and actions; whose person and
proper­

ty were guarded by equal law; and who exercised his independent vote in the

government of the republic. Their numbers seem to be multiplied by the strong

and various discriminations of character: under the shield of freedom, on the

wings of emulation and vanity, each Athenian aspired to the level of the
national

dignity: from this commanding eminence, some chosen spirits soared beyond the

reac\i of a vulgar eye; and the chances of superior merit in a great and
populous

kingdom, as they are proved by experience, would excuse the computation of

imaginary millions. The territories of Athens, Sparta, and their allies, do
not

exceed a moderate province of France or England: but after the trophies of Sa-

lamis and Platiea, they expand in our fancy to the gigantic size of Asia which

had been trampled under the feet of the victorious Greeks. But the subjects of

the Byzantine empire, who assume and dishonour the names both of Greeks

and Romans, present a dead uniformity of abject vices, which are neither soft­

ened by the weakness of humanity, nor animated by the vigour of memorable

crimes. The freemen of antiquity might repeat with generous enthusiasm the

sentence of Homer, that on the first day of his servitude, the captive is
deprived

of one-half of his manly virtue. But the poet had only seen the effects of
civil or

domestic slavery, nor could he foretel that the second moiety of manhood must
be

annihilated by the spiritual despotism, which shackles, not only the actions,
but

even the thoughts, of the prostrate votary. By this double yoke, the Greeks

were oppressed under the successors of Heraclius, the tyrant; a law of eternal

justice was degraded by the vices of his subjects; and on the throne, in the
camp,

in the schools, we search, perhaps with fruitless diligence, the names and
charac­

ters that may deserve to be rescued from oblivion. Nor are the defects of the

subjects compensated by the skill and variety of the painters. Of a space of

eight hundred years, the four first centuries are overspread with a cloud
inter­

rupted by some faint and broken rays of historic light: in the lives of the
empe­

