THE DECLINE AND FALI*

six days'journey, in the neighbourhood of Tebeste,(l) he was astonished by the

superior numbers and fierce aspect of the barbarians. He proposed a treaty;
so­

licited a reconciliation; and offered to bind himself by the most solemn
oaths.

" By what oaths can he bind himself? (interrupted the indignant Moors.) Will

he swear by the gospels, the divine books of the Christians? It was on those

books that the faith of his nephew Sergius was pledged to eighty of our
innocent

and unfortunate brethren. Before we trust them a second time, let us try their

efficacy in the chastisement of perjury, and the vindication of their own
honour."

Their honour was vindicated in the field of Tebeste, by the death of Solomon,

and the total loss of his army. The arrival of fresh troops and more skilful
com­

manders, soon checked the insolence of the Moors; seventeen of their princes

were slain in the same battle; and the doubtful and transient submission of
their

tribes was celebrated with lavish applause by the people of Constantinople.
Suc­

cessive inroads had reduced the province of Africa to one-third of the measure
of

Italy; yet the Roman emperors continued to reign above a century over
Carthage,

and the fruitful coast of the Mediterranean. But the victories and the losses
of

Justinian were alike pernicious to mankind; and such was the desolation of
Africa,

that in many parts a stranger might wander whole days without meeting the face

either of a friend or an enemy. The nation of the Vandals had disappeared;
they

once amounted to a hundred and sixty thousand warriors, without including the

children, the women, or the slaves. Their numbers were infinitely surpassed by

the number of the Moorish families extirpated in a relentless war; and the
same

destruction was retaliated on the Romans and their allies, who perished by the
cli­

mate, their mutual quarrels, and the rage of the barbarians. When Procopius

first landed, he admired the populousness of the cities and country,
strenuously

exercised in the labours of commerce and agriculture. In less than twenty
years,

that busy scene was converted into a silent solitude; the wealthy citizens
escaped to

Sicily and Constantinople; and the secret historian has confidently affirmed,
that

five millions of Africans were consumed by the wars and government of the em­

peror Justinian.(2)

The jealousy of the Byzantine court had not permitted Belisarius to achieve
the

conquest of Italy; and his abrupt departure revived the courage of the
Goths,(3)

who respected his genius, his virtue, and even the laudable motive which had
ur­

ged the servant of Justinian to deceive and reject them. They had lost their
king

(an inconsiderable loss,) their capital, their treasures, the provinces from
Sicily

to the Alps, and the military force of two hundred thousand barbarians,
magnifi­

cently equipped with horses and arms. Yet all was not lost, as long as Pavia
was

defended by one thousand Goths, inspired by a sense of honour, the love of
free­

dom, and the memory of their past greatness. The supreme command was una­

nimously offered to the brave Uraias; and it was in his eyes alone that the
disgrace

of his uncle Vitiges could appear as a reason of exclusion. His voice inclined
the

election in favour of Hildibald, whose personal merit was recommended by the

vain hope that his kinsman Theudes, the Spanish monarch, would support the

common interest of the Gothic nation. The success of his arms in Liguria and

Venetia seemed to justify their choice; but he soon declared to the world,
that he

was incapable of forgiving or commanding his benefactor. The consort of Hildi­

bald was deeply wounded by the beauty, the riches, and the pride of the wife
of

Uraias; and the death of that virtuous patriot excited the indignation of a
free peo­

ple. A bold assassin executed their sentence by striking off the head of
Hildi­

bald in the midst of a banquet; the Kugians, a foreign tribe, assumed the
privilege

of election; and Totila, the nephew of the late king, was tempted, by revenge,
to

deliver himself and the garrison of Trevigo into the hands of the Romans. But

the gallant and accomplished youth was easily persuaded to prefer the Gothic

throne before the service of Justinian; and as soon as the palace of Pavia had
been

(1) Now Tibesh, in the kingdom of Algiers. It is watered by a river, the
Sitierass, which falls into the Me-

jeola. t (Bagradas.) Tibesh is stilt remarkable for its walls of large stones
(like the Coliseum of Rome,) a

fountain and a grove of walnut-trees: the country is fruitful, and the
neighbouring Bereberes are warlike. It

appears from an inscription, that, under the reign of Adrian, the road from
Carthage to Tebeste was con­

structed by the third legion. (Marmol. Description de I'Afrique, torn. ii. p.
442, 443. Shaw's Travels, p.

64—66.)

(2) Procopius, Anecdot. c. 18. The series of the African history attests this
melancholy trulh.

(3) In the second (e. 30.) and third books, (c. J—40.) Procopius continues the
history of the Gothic war

from the fifth to the fifteenth year of Justinian. As the events are less
interesting than in the former period,

he allots only half the space to double the time. Jornandes and the Chronicle
of Marcellinus, afford some

collateral hints. Sigonms, Psgi, Muratori, Matcou, and De Buat, are useful,
and have been used.

