THE DECLINE AND FALL

come. And I deny him that was crucified, and whosoever worships him. And 1

choose God for my Lord, Islam for my faith, Mecca for my temple, the Moslems

for my brethren, and Mahomet for my prophet; who was sent to lead us into the

right way, and to exalt the true religion, in spite of those who join partners
with

God." a i j

The conquest of Bosra, four days' journey from Damascus. (1) encouraged the

Arabs to besiege the ancient capital of Syria.(2) At some distance from the
walls,

they encamped among the groves and fountains of that delicious territory,(3)
and

the usual option of the Mahometan faith, of tribute or of war, was proposed to

the resolute citizens, who had been lately strengthened by a re-enforcement of

five thousand Greeks. In the decline, as in the infancy of the military art, a
hos­

tile defiance was frequently offered and accepted by the generals themselves
:(4)

many a lance was shivered in the plain of Damascus, and the personal prowess
of

Caled was signalized in the first sally of the besieged. After an obstinate
combat,

he had overthrown and made prisoner one of the Christian leaders, a stout and

worthy antagonist. He instantly mounted a fresh horse, the gift of the
governor

of Palmyra, and pushed forwards to the front of battle. " Repose yourself for
a

moment," said his friend Derar, " and permit me to supply your place: you are

fatigued with fighting with this dog."—"O Derar!" replied the indefatigable
Sara­

cen, *' we shall rest in the world to come. He that labours to-day shall rest
to-mor­

row." With the same unabated ardour, Caled answered, encountered, and van­

quished a second champion; and the heads of his two captives, who refused to

abandon their religion, were indignantly hurled into the midst of the city.
The

event of some general and partial actions reduced the Damascenes to a closer
de­

fence: but a messenger, whom they dropped from the walls returned with the

promise of speedy and powerful succour, and their tumultuous joy conveyed the

intelligence to the camp of the Arabs. After some debate, it was resolved by
the

generals to raise, or rather to suspend, the siege of Damascus, till they had
given

battle to the forces of the emperor. In the retreat, Caled would have chosen
the

more perilous station of the rear-guard; he modestly yielded to the wishes of
Abu

Obeidah. But in the hour of danger he flew to the rescue of his companion, who

was rudely pressed by a sally of six thousand horse and ten thousand foot, and

few among the Christians could relate at Damascus, the circumstances of their

defeat. The importance of the contest required the junction of the Saracens
who

were dispersed on the frontiers of Syria and Palestine; and I shall transcribe
one

of the circular mandates which was addressed to Amrou, the future conqueror of

Egypt. " In the name of the most merciful God: from Caled to Amrou, health

and happiness. Know that thy brethren the Moslems design to march to Aizna-

din, where there is an army of seventy thousand Greeks, who propose to come

against us, that they may extinguish the light of God with their mouths: but
God

preserveth his light in spite of the infidels. (5) As soon, therefore, as this
let­

ter of mine shall be delivered to thy hands, come with those that are with
thee to

Aiznadin, where thou shalt find us, if it please the most high God." The sum­

mons was cheerfully obeyed, and the forty-five thousand Moslems who met on the

same day, on the same spot, ascribed to the blessing of Providence the effects
of

their activity and zeal.

About four years after the triumphs of the Persian war, the repose of
Heraclius

and the empire was again disturbed by a new enemy, the power of whose religion

was more strongly felt than it was clearly understood by the Christians of the
east.

(1) Damascus is amply described by the Sherif at Edrisi, (Geograph. Nub. 118,
117.) and his translator, Sio-

mta, (Appendix, c t.) Abulfeda. (Tabula Syria, p. 100.) Schu liens. (Indea.
Geograph. ad Vit. Saladin.)

d'Herbelot, (Biblior. Orient, p. 291.) Thcvenoi, (Voyage du Levant, part i. p.
688—698.) Maundrell, (Journey

from Aleppo to Jerusalem, p. 122—130.) and Pocock. (Description of the East,
vol. ii. p. 117—127.)

(2) Noblmima civitas, says Justin. According to the oriental traditions, it
was older than Abraham or Semi-

ramis. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. i. c. 6,7. p. 24.29. edit. Havercamp. Justin,
36. 2.

(3) EJn yxp Gt/xti tov AiO,- 7rs\tv »\t|9*c, x*i tm,- 'E»*,- xttxvh;
et5**.Jwoi', Tijir (fpxii Kai ^lyirTilv ActfcMncav Xiyx,

TOis TS »XA.0i; trvfiirxa-iYj otov npjyy ftoXAfl, xse* vimv ftsytSu, xtei jtp-
ov tvx-AlfH* gal nfytn etyKxix Km lecratfiov trKrfsi,

>u*»}-i; *u?opi* v,x«o.etf, &c. Julian, epist. 24. p. 392. These splendid
epithets are occasioned by the figs of Da­

mascus, of which the author st-nds a hundred to his friend Serapion,and this
rhetorical theme is inserted by Pe-

tavius, Spanbeim, &c. (p. 390—396.) among the genuine epistles of Julian. How
could they overlook that the

writer is an inhabitant of Damascus (he thrice affirms, that this peculiar fig
grows only Toep' nvuvj a city which

Julian never entered or approached?

(4) Voltaire, who casts a keen and lively glance over the surface of history,
has been strnck with the resem­

blance of the fi i st Moslems and the heroes of the Iliad; the siege of Troy
and that of Damascus. (Hist. Gene-

rale, torn. i. p. 348.)

(5) These words are a teat of the Koran, c. 9. 32. 61.8. Like our fanatics of
the last century, the Moslems,

on every familiar or important occasion, spoke the language of their
scriptures; a style more natural in their

months, than the Hebrew idiom transplanted into rhe climate and dialect of
Britain.

