THE' DECLINE AND FALL-

Solemn offices of religion, -which served at least to heal the imagination,
rfnd re­

store the hopes, of the multitude. The public defence had been long neglected,

not from the presumption of peace, but from the distress and poverty of the
times.

As far as the scantiness of his means and the shortness of his leisure would
allow,

the ancient walls were repaired by the command of Leo; fifteen towers, in the

most accessible stations, were built or renewed; two of these commanded on
either

side the Tiber; and an iron chain was drawn across the stream to impede the
as­

cent of a hostile navy. The Romans were assured of a short respite by the wel­

come news, that the siege of Gayeta had been raised, and that a part of the
enemy,

with their sacrilegious plunder, had perished in the waves.

But the storm which had been delayed, soon burst upan them with redoubled

Violence. The Aglabite,(l) who reigned in Africa, had inherited from his
father a

treasure and an army: a fleet of Arabs and Moors, after a short refreshment in
the

harbours of Sardinia, cast anchor before the mouth of the Tiber, sixteen miles

from the city; and their discipline and numbers appeared to threaten, not a
tran­

sient inroad, but a serious design of conquest and dominion. But the vigilance
of.

Leo had formed an alliance with the vassals of the Greek empire, the free and

maritime states of Gayeta, Naples, and Amalfi; and in the hour of danger,
their

gallevs appeared in the port of Ostia, under the command of C«esarius, the son
of

the Neapolitan duke, a noble and valiant youth, who had already vanquished the

fleets of the Saracens. With his principal companions, Caesarius was invited
to

the Lateran palace, and the dexterous pontiff affected to inquire their
errand, and

to accept with joy and surprise their providential succour. The city bands, in
,

arms, attended their father to Ostia, where he reviewed and blessed his
generous

deliverers. They kissed his feet, receive4 the communion with martial
devotion,

and listened to the prayer of Leo, that the same God who had supported St.
Peter

and St? Paul on the waves of the sea, would strengthen the hands of his cham­

pions against the adversaries of his holy name. After a similar prayer, and
with

equal resolution, the Moslems advanced to the attack of the Christian galleys,

which preserved their advantageous station along the coast. The victory
inclined

toythe side of the allies, when it was less gloriously decided in their favour
by a

sudden tempest, which confounded the skill and courage of the stoutest
mariners.

The Christians were sheltered in a friendly harbour, while the Africans were

scattered and dashed in pieces among the rocks and islands of a hostile shore.

Those who escaped from shipwreck and hunger, neither found nor deserved mercy

at the hands of their implacable pursuers. The sword and the gibbet reduced
the

dangerous multitude of captives; and the remainder was more usefully employed,

to restore the sacred edifices which they had attempted to subvert. ' The
pontiff,

at the head of the citizens and allies, paid his grateful devotion at the
shrines of

the apostles; and among the spoils of this naval victory, thirteen Arabian
bows of

pure and massy silver were suspended round the altar of the fishermen of
Galilee.

The reign of Leo the Fourth was employed in the defence and ornament of the

Roman state. The churches were renewed and embellished; near four thousand

pounds of silver were consecrated to repair the losses of St. Peter; and his
sanctu­

ary was decorated with a plate of gold the weight of two hundred and sixteen

pounds, embossed with the portraits of the pope and emperor, and encircled
with

a string of pearls. Yet this vain magnificence reflects less glory on the
character

of Leo, than the paternal care with which he rebuilt the walls of Horta and
Arae-

ria; and transported the wandering inhabitants of Centunicella; to his new
founda­

tion of Leopolis, twelve miles from the sea-shore. (2) By his liberality a
colony of

Corsicans, with their wives and children, was planted in the station of Porto
at the

mouth of the Tiber: the falling city was restored for their use, the fields
and vine­

yards were divided among the new settlers: their first efforts were assisted
by a

gift of horses and cattle; and the hardy exiles, who breathed revenge against
the

Saracens, swore to live and die under the standard of St. Peter. The nations
of

the west and north who visited the threshold of the apostles, had gradually
formed

the large and populous suburb of the Vatican, and their various habitations
were

distinguished, in the language of the times, as the schools of the Greeks and
Goths,

of the Lombards and Saxons. But this venerable spot was still open to
sacrilegious

(1) De Guipiei, Hist. Generate des Huns, torn.!. p. 3M,S64. Cardmine, Hist, de
l'Afrique el de I'Kipaenc.

sons la Domination des Arabes. torn. 2. p. 34, 35. I observe, and cannot
reconcile, the difierence of these writers

in the succession of the A g.Rhites.

(2) Beretti (Chronographia Italia; Medii ^Evi, p. j,oo. 108.) has illustrated
CeuWmcellK, I.eopoUs, Civitar

Loonma,and the other p!it«es of the Roman duelif.

