THE decline and fall

affectionate Zeid was tempted by the prospect of freedom: the illustrious Ali,
the

son of Abu Taleb, embraced the sentiments of his cousin with the spirit of a

youthful hero; and the wealth, the moderation, the veracity of Abubeker, con­

firmed the religion of the propheftnvhom he was destined to succeed. . By his
per­

suasion, ten of the most respectable citizens of Mecca were introduced to the
pri­

vate lessons of Islam; they yielded to the voice of reason and enthusiasm;
they

repeated the fundamental creed,—" There is but one God, and Mahomet is the

apostle of God;" and their faith, even in this life, was rewarded with riches
and

honours, With the command of armies, and the government of kingdoms. Three

years were silently employed in the conversion of fourteen proselytes, the
first

fruits of his mission; but in the fourth year he assumed the prophetic office,
and

resolving to impart to his family the light of divine truth, he prepared a
banquet,

a lamb, as it is said, and a bowl of milk, for the entertainment of forty
guests of

the race of Hashem. " Friends and kinsmen," said Mahomet to the assembly,

" I offer you, and I alone can offer, the most precious of gifts, the
treasures of this

world and of the world to come. God has commanded me to call you to his ser­

vice. Who among you will support my burden ? Who among you will be my

companion and my vizir No answer was returned, till the silence of asto­

nishment, and doubt, and contempt, was at length broken by the impatient cou­

rage of Ali, a youth in the fourteenth year of his age. " O prophet, I am the

man; whosoever rises against thee, I will dash out his teeth, tear out his
eyes,

break his legs, rip up his belly. O prophet, I will be thy vizir over them."
Ma­

homet accepted his offer with transport, and Abu Taleb was ironically exhorted

to respect the superior dignity of his son. In a more serious tone, the father
of

Ali advised his nephew to relinquish his impracticable design. " Spare your
re­

monstrances," replied the intrepid fanatic to his uncle and benefactor, "if
they

' should place the sun on my right hand, and the moon on my left, they should
not

divert me from my course." He persevered ten years in the exercise of his mis­

sion; and the religion which has overspread the east and the west, advanced
with

a slow and. painful progress within the walls of Mecca. Yet Mahomet enjoyed

the satisfaction of beholding the increase of his infant congregation of
unitarians,

who revered him as a prophet, and to whom he seasonably dispensed the
spiritual

nourishment of the Koran. The number of proselytes may be estimated by the

absence of eighty-three men and eighteen women, who retired to Ethiopia in the

seventh year of his mission; and his party was fortified by the timely
conversion

of his uncle Hamza, and of the fierce and inflexible Omar, who signalized in

the cause of Islam the same zeal which he had exerted for its destruction. Nor

was the charity of Mahomet confined to the tribe of Koreish or the precincts
of Mec­

ca: on solemn festivals, in the days of pilgrimage, he frequented the Caaba,
ac­

costed the strangers of every tribe, and urged, both in private converse and
pub­

lic discourse, the belief and worship of a sole deity. Conscious of his reason
and

of his weakness, he asserted the liberty of conscience, and disclaimed the use
of

religious violence;(2) but he called the Arabs to repentance, and conjured
them

to remember the ancient idolaters of Ad and Thamund, whom the divine justice

had swept away from the face of the earth. (3)

The-people of Mecca were hardened in their unbelief by superstition and envy.

The elders of the city, the uncles of the prophet, affected to despise the
presump­

tion of an orphan, the reformer of his country: the pious orations of Mahomet
in

the Caaba were answered by the clamours of Abu Taleb. " Citizens and pil­

grims, listen not to the tempter, hearken not to his impious novelties. Stand
fast

in the worship of Al Lata and Al Uzzah." Yet the son of Abdallah was ever

dear to the aged chief; and he protected the fame and person of his nephew
against

the assaults of the Koreishites, who had long been jealous of the pre-eminence
of

the family of Hashem. Their malice was coloured with the pretence of religion:

(1) Vezirw, portitor, bqjulus, onus fa-em! and this plebeian name was
transferred by an apt metaphor to

the pillars of the state. (Gagnier. Not. ad Abulfed. p. 19.) I endeavour to
preserve the Arabian idiom, as far as

I can feel it myself in a Latin or French translation.

(2) The passages of the Koran in the behalf of toleration, are strong and
numerous: c 2.T. 357. e. 16.129. e.

17. 54. c. 45.15. e. 50.39. c. 88. 21, &c. with the notes of Maracei and Sale.
This character alone may gene­

rally decide the doubts of the learned, whether a chapter was revealed at
Mecca or Medina.

(3) See the Koran (passim, and especially e. 7. p. 123,124. &c.Jand the
tradition of the Arabs (Pocock, Spe­

cimen, p. 35—37.) The caverns of the tribe of Thamund, fit for men of the
ordinary stature, were shown in

the midway between Medina and Damascns,( Abulfed. Arabia Descript. p. 43, 44.)
and may be probably ascribed

to the Troglodites of the primitive world, Michaelis, and Lowth tie I'oesi
Hebrteor. p. 131—134, Recherche*

*ur les Egyptiens, torn. ii. p. 48, &c.

