OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 205

they started, measured back their steps, and were again involved in the gloom
of

impenetrable orthodoxy. To purge themselves from the guilt or reproach of

damnable error, they disavowed their consequences, explained their principles,

excused their indiscretions, and unanimously pronounced the sounds of concord

and faith. Yet a latent and almost invisible spark still lurked among the
embers

of controversy: by the breath of prejudice and passion it was quickly kindled
to a

mighty flame, and the verbal disputers(l) of the oriental sects have shaken
the

pillars of the church and state.

The name of Cyril of Alexandria is famous in controversial story, and the ti­

tle of saint is a mark that his opinions and his party have finally prevailed.
In

the house of his uncle, the archbishop Theophilus, he imbibed the orthodox
les­

sons of zcal and dominion, and five years of his youth were profitably spent
in the

adjacent monasteries of Nitria. Under the tuition of the abbot Serapion, he
ap­

plied himself to ecclesiastical studies, with such indefatigable ardour, that,
in the

course of one sleepless night, he has perused the four gospels, the catholic
epis­

tles, and the epistle to the Romans. Origen he detested: but the writings of
Cle­

mens and Dionysius, of Athanasius and Basil, were continually in his hands: by
the

theory and practice of dispute, his faith was confirmed, and his wit was
sharpened:

he extended round his cell the cobwebs of scholastic theology, and meditated
the

works of allegory and metaphysics, whose remains, in seven verbose folios, now

peaceably slumber by the side of their rivals.(2) Cyril prayed and fasted in
the

desert, but his thoughts (it is the reproach of a friend)(3) were still fixed
on the

world; and the call of Theophilus, who summoned him to the tumult of cities
and

synods, was too readily obeyed by the aspiring hermit. With the approbation of

his uncle, he assumed the office, and acquired the fame of a,popular preacher.

His comely person adorned the pulpit, the harmony of his voice resounded in
the

cathedral, his friends were stationed to lead or second the applause of the
congre­

gation, (4) and the hasty notes of the scribes preserved his discourses,
which, in

their effect, though not in their composition, might be compared with those of
the

Athenian orators. The death of Theophilus expanded and realized the hopes of

his nephew. The clergy of Alexandria were divided; the soldiers, and their ge­

neral supported the claims of the archdeacon; but a resistless multitude, with

voices and with hands, asserted the cause of their favourite; and, after a
period of

thirty-nine years, Cyril was seated on the throne of Athanasius. (5)

The prize was not unworthy of his ambition. At a distance from the court, and

at the head of an immense capital, the patriarch, as he was now styled, of
Alex­

andria, had gradually usurped the state and authority of a civil magistrate.
The

public and private charities of the city were managed by his discretion; his
voice

inflamed or appeased the passions of the multitude; his commands were blindly

obeyed by his numerous and fanatic fiarabolani,(6) familiarized in their daily
of­

fice with scenes of death; and the prefects of Egypt were awed or provoked by

the temporal power of these Christian pontiffs. Ardent in the prosecution of

heresy, Cyril auspiciously opened his reign by oppressing the Novatians, the
most

innocent and harmless of the sectaries. The interdiction of their religious
wor­

ship appeared in his eyes a just and meritorious act; and he confiscated their
holy

vessels without apprehending the guilt of sacrilege. The toleration and even
the

^1) I appeal to the sonfession of two oriental prelates. Gregory
Abulpharagius, the Jacobite primate of the

east,and Elias.the Nestorian metropolitan of Damascus (gee Aiseman.
Bibliothec. Oriental, torn. ii. p. 291.;

torn. iii. p. 514, 8ce.O that the Melchites, Jacobites, Neatorians, &c. agree
in the doctrine, and differ only in the

expression. Our most learned and rational divine*—Basnage, Le Clerc,
Beauiobre, La Croze, Moshcim,

Jablonsks—are inclined to favour this charitable judgment; but the zeal of
Petavius is loud and angry, and

the moderation of Dupin is conveyed in a whisper.

(2) La Croze (Hist, da Christiamsme des Indes, torn. i. p. 24.) avows his
contempt for the genius and writings

of Cyril. De tous let ouvrages des ancieus, il y en a peu qu'on lise avec
moms' (Tutilite: and Dupin (Biblio-

tbeque Eccleiiastique, torn. iv. p. 42—52.,) in words of respect, teaches us
to despise them.

(3) Of Isidore of Pelusiutn (lib. i. epist. 25. p. 8.) As the letter is not of
the most eretlitable sort, Tillemont,

less sincere titan the Bollandists, affects a doubt whether this Cyril is the
nephew of Theophilus (Mem. Eccles.

torn. xiv. p. 268.)

(4) A gtatnmarian is named by Socrates, (lib. vii, 13..) Stamp; J, eo^ix-nt;
to-j cmrxoweii Kwp«w.ou xaasarw,-, ***

5TI3* TO KfOroo; ivtxi; SiSxnxKixi; auTOw lyttativ yj crauSaorOTCs.

(5) See the youth and promotion of Cyril, in Socrates (lib. vii. c. 7.) and
Bcnaudot (Hist. Patriarch, Al«xan-

drin. p. 106—108.) The Abbe Renaudot drew his materials from the Arabic
History of Severus, bishop of

llerraonolis Magna, or Ashmunein, in the tenth century, who can never be
trusted, unless our assent is extort­

ed by the internal evidence of facts.

(6) The parabolani of Alexandria were a charitable corporation, instituted
during the plague of Oallientls,

Jo visit the sick and to bury the dead. They gradually enlarged, abused, and
told the privileges of their order,

1 heir outrageous conduct during the reign of Cyril provoked the emperor to
deprive the patriarchs of their

nomination, and restrained their number to five or six hundred. But these
restraints were transient and ineP-

teetual. See the Theodoiian Code, lib. svi. tit, 2. and Tillemont,Mem. Ecclej.
torn. xiv. p. 276-276.

