OP THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

Ins laborious studies of grammar and philosophy. (1) Emboldened by. this fami­

liar intercourse, Philoponus presumed to solicit a gift, inestimable in his
opinion,

contemptible in that of the barbarisms; the royal library, which alone among
the

spoils of Alexandria, had not been appropriated by the visit and the seal of
the

conqueror. Amrou was inclined to gratify the wish of the grammarian, but his

rigid integrity refused to alienate the minutest object without the consent of
the

caliph; and the well-known answer of Omar was inspired by the ignorance of a

fanatic. " If these writings of the Greeks agree with the book of God, they
are

useless, and need not be preserved: if they disagree, they are pernicious, and

ought to be destroyed." The sentence was executed with blind obedience; the
vo­

lumes of paper or parchment were distributed to the four thousand baths of the

city; and such was their incredible multitude, that six months were barely
suffi­

cient for the consumption of this precious fuel. Since the dynasties of
Abulpha-

ragius(2) have been given to the world in a Latin version, the tale has been
re­

peatedly transcribed: and every scholar, with pious indignation, has deplored
the

irreparable shipwreck of the learning, the arts, and the genius of antiquity.
For

my own part I am strongly tempted to deny both the fact and the consequences.

The fact is indeed marvellous. Read and wonder! says the historian himself:

and the solitary report of a stranger who wrote at the end of six hundred
years

on the confines of Media, is overbalanced by the silence of two annalists of a

more early date, both Christians, both natives of Egypt, and the most ancient
of

whom, the patriarch Eutychius, has amply described the conquest of Alexan­

dria. (3) The rigid sentence of Omar is repugnant to the sound and orthodox

precept of the Mahometan casuists: they expressly declare that the religious

books ef the Jews and Christians, which are acquired by the right of war,
should

never be committed to the flames; and that the works of profane science,
histo­

rians, or poets, physicians or philosophers, may be lawfully applied to the
use of

the faithful. (4) • A more destructive zeal may perhaps be attributed to the
first

successors of Mahomet; yet in this instance, the conflagration would have
speedi­

ly expired in the deficiency of materials. I shall not recapitulate the
disasters

of the Alexandrian library, the involuntary flames that were kindled by Cjcsar
in

his own defence,(5) or the mischievous bigotry of the Christians, who studied
to

destroy the monuments of idolatry. (6) But if we gradually descend from the

age of the Antonines to that of Theodosius, we shall learn from a chain of co-

temporary witnesses, that the royal palace and the temple of Serapis no longer

contained the four, or the seven, hundred thousand volumes, which had been as­

sembled by the curiosity and magnificence of the Ptolemies. (7) Perhaps the

church and seat of the patriarchs might be enriched with a repository of
books;

but if the ponderous mass of Arian and Monophysite controversy were indeed
con­

sumed in the public baths,(8) a philosopher may allow, with a smile, that it
was

ultimately devoted to the benefit of mankind. I sincerely regret the more
valua­

ble libraries which have been involved in the ruin of the Roman empire: but
when

I seriously compute the lapse of ages, the waste of ignorance, and the
calamities

of war, our treasures, rather than our losses, are the object of my surprise.
Many

(1) Many treatises of this lover of labour (cixcii-avoc) are still extant; but
fur readers of the present age, the

printed and unpublished are nearly in the same predicament. Moses and
Aristotle are the chief objects of his

verbose commentaries, one of which is dated as early as May 10, A. U. tin.
(Fabric, liibliot. Graic. torn. ix. p.

458—468.) A modern (John Le Clerc,) who someiimes assumes the same name, was
equal to old Philoponus m

diligence, and far superior in good sense and real knowledge.

(2) Abulpharag. Dynast, p. 114. vers. Poeock. Audi quid factum sit eynirare.
It would be endless to enu­

merate the modems who have wondered and believed, but I may distinguish with
honour the rational scepti­

cism of Renaudot: (Hist. Alex. Patriarch, p. 170.) historia .... habet aliqnid
m.3-t:v ut Arabibus familiare

est.

(3) This curious anecdote will be vainly sought in the annals of Eutychius and
the Saracenic history of El-

macin. The silence of Abulf^da, Mortadi, and a crowd of Moslems, is less
conclusise from their ignorance of

Christian literature.

(4) See Iteland, de Jure Mililuri Mnhammedanorum, in his third volume of
Dissertations', p. 37. The r- asons

for not burning the religious books of the Jews or Christians, is derived from
the respect that is due to the name

of Ond.

(5) Consult the collections of Frensheiin (Supplement. Livian. e. 12. 43.)
anil Usher. Aunal. p. 4tio.) Livy

himself bad styled the Alexandrian library, eh gantiae regum cuiaiqtie
egregium opus; a liberal encomium, for

which he is partly criticised by the narrow stoicism of Seneca, (De
l'ranquillitale Animi, e. y.) whose wisdom,

on this occasion, deviates into nonsense.

(6) See this History, vol. v. p. 111.

(7) Aulus Gellius (Noctes Atticse, 6. 17.) Ammianas Mareellinus, (22. 16.) and
Orosius. (lib. vi. c. 15.) They

all speak in xhepaet tense, and the words of Ammianus are remarkably strong:
fuerunt Bibliothece innume*

rabiles: et loquitur monumentoruni veterum concinens fidi s. Sic.

(8) Renaudot answers for version, of the Bible. Hexapla Catena; Patrum,
Commentaries, fcc. (p. 170.) Our

Alexandrian MS.if it came from Egypt, and not from Constantinople, or mount
Athos, (Wetstein, Prolegom.

at N. T. p. 8, Sec.) mightpossiOOj be among them.

