308 THE DECLINE AND FALL

Mahomet erected his holy standard, (1) that kingdom was a province of the Pef»

sian empire; yet seven princes of the Homerites still reigned in the
mountains;

and the vicegerent of Chosroes was tempted to forget his distant country and
his

unfortunate master. The historians of the age of Justinian represent the state
of

the independent Arabs, who were divided by interest or affection in the long
quar­

rel of the east; the tribe of Gassan was allowed to encamp on the Syrian
terri­

tory; the princes of Hira were permitted to form a city about forty miles to
the

southward of the ruins of Babylon. Their service in the field was speedy and

vigorous: but their friendship was venal, their faith inconstant, their enmity
ca­

pricious: it was an easier task to excite than to disarm these roving
barbarians;

and in the familiar intercourse of war, they learned to see, and to despise,
the

splendid weakness both of Rome and of Persia. From Mecca to the Euphrates,

the Arabian tribes(2) were confounded by the Greeks and Latins, under the ge­

neral appellation of Saracens,(3) a name which every Christian mouth has been

taught to pronounce with terror and abhorrence.

The slaves of domestic tyranny may vainly exult in their national
independence;

but the Arab is personally free; and he enjoys, in some degree, the benefits
of so­

ciety, without forfeiting the prerogatives of nature. In every tribe,
superstition,

or gratitude, or fortune, has exalted a particular family above the heads of
their

equals. The dignities of sheich and emir invariably descend in this chosen
race;

but the order of succession is loose and precarious; and the most worthy or
aged

of the noble kinsmen are preferred to the simple, though important, office of
com­

posing disputes by their advice, and guiding valour by their example. Even a
fe­

male of sense and spirit has been permitted to command the countrymen of Ze-

nobia. (4) The momentary junction of several tribes produces an army; their
more

lasting union constitutes a nation; and the supreme chief, the emir of emirs,
whose

banner is displayed at their head, may deserve, in the eyes of strangers, the
honours

of the kingly name. If the Arabian princes abuse their power, they are quickly

punished by the desertion of their subjects, who had been accustomed to a mild

and parental jurisdiction. Their spirit is free, their steps are unconfined,
the de­

sert is open, and the tribes and families are held together by a mutual and
volun­

tary compact. The softer natives of Yemen supported the pomp and majesty of

a monarch; but if he could not leave his palace without endangering
hislife,(5)

the active powers of government must have been devolved on his nobles and ma­

gistrates. The cities of Mecca and Medina present, in the heart of Asia, the
form

or rather the substance, of a commonwealth. The grandfather of Mahomet, and

his lineal ancestors, appear in foreign and domestic transactions as the
princes of

their country; but they reigned, like Pericles at Athens, or the Medici at
Florence,

by the opinion of their wisdom and integrity ; their influence was divided
with their

patrimony; and the sceptre was transferred from the uncles of the prophet to a

younger branch of the tribe of Koreish. On solemn occasions they convened the

assembly of the people; and since mankind must be either compelled or
persuaded

to obey, the use and reputation of oratory among the ancient Arabs is the
clearest

evidence of public freedom. (6) But their simple freedom was of a very
different

Cast from the nice and artificial machinery of the Greek and Roman republics,
in

(1) See the imperfect history of Yemen in Pocock, Specimen, p. 55—66. of Hira,
p. 66—74. of Gassan, p. 75.

—78. as far as it could be known or preserved in the time of ignorance.

(2) The ^xpxn.i\vittx $ua.s(, juvpi*^; t*ut« *«i to Trkt tTTtv mjtoiv
ipquevo/zei, jt»i aJfiecroToi, are described by Me-

uander, £ Excerpt. Legation, p. 149.) Procopius, (de Bell. Persic, lib. i. c.
17.19. lib. ii. c. 10.) and, in the

most lively colours, by Aramianus Marcellinus, (lib. xir. c. 4.) who had
spoken of them as early as the reign of

Marcus.

(3) The name which,1lsed by Ptolemy and Pliny, in a more confined, by Ammianns
and Procopius in a

larger sense, has been derived, ridiculously, from Sarah, the wife of
Abraham', obscurely from the village of

'Saraka, (iustbi N«3«T«ieu;; Stephan de Urbibos) more plausibly from the
Arabic words, which signify a thievish

character, or oriental situation. (Hottinger, Hist. Oriental, lib. i. c 1. p.
7.8. Pocock, Specimen, p. 33. 35. As*

seman. Bibliot.t>rient. torn. iv. p. 567.) Yet the last and most popular of
these etymologies, is refuted by Pto­

lemy, (Arabia, p. 2. 18. in Hudson, torn, iv.) who expressly remarks the
western and southern positions of the

Saracens, then an obscnre tribe on the borders of Egypt. The appellation
cannot therefore allude to anyfta-

iional character; and, since it was imposed by strangers, it must be found,
not in the Arabic, but in a foreign

language.

(4) Saraceni.... mulieres aiunt in eos regnare. (Expositio totius Mundi, p. 3.
in Hudson, torn, iii.) The

reign of Mavia is famous in ecclesiastical story. Pocock, Specimen, p. 69. 83.

(5) -jSs i§,*v«i e* tow sWiXfiwy, is the report of Agatharades, (de Mari
Rubro, p. 63,64. in Hudson, torn, i.)

Biodorus Stculos, (torn. i. lib. iii. c. 47. p. 215.) and Strabo. (lib. xvi.
p. 1124.) But I much suspect that this

is one of the popular tales, or extraordinary accidents, which the credulity
of travellers so often transforms

into a fact, a custom, and a law.

(6) Non gloriabantur antiquitus Arabes, nisi gladio, hospite, et ekquentia.
(Sephadius, apnd Pocoek, Speci­

men, p. lai, 162.) This gift of speech they shared only with the Persians: and
the sententious Arabs svoaM

■probably have disdained the simple and sublime logic of Demosthenes.

