56 THE DECLINE AND FALL

tenant of Justinian to accept their voluntary allegiance, and. to enter the
city, whose

gates would be thrown open for his reception. As soon as Belisarius had
fortified

his n«w conquests, Naples and Cumse, he advanced about twenty miles to the

banks of the Vulturnus, contemplated the decayed grandeur of Capua, and halted

at the separation of the Latin and Appian ways. The work of the censor, after

the incessant use of nine centuries, still preserved its primeval beauty, and
not a

flaw could be discovered in the large polished stones, of which that solid,
though

narrow road, was so firmly compacted. (1) Belisarius, however, preferred the

Latin way, which at a distance from the sea and marshes, skirted in the space
of

one hundred and twenty miles along the foot of the mountains. His enemies had

disappeared: when he made his entrance through the Asinarian gate, the garri­

son departed without molestation along the Flaminian way; and the city, after
six­

ty years' servitude, was delivered from the yoke of the barbarians. Leuderis
alone,

from a motive of pride or discontent, refused to accompany the fugitives; and
the

Gothic chief, himself a trophy of the victory, was sent with the keys of Rome
to

the throne of the emperor Justinian. (2)

The first days, which coincided with the old Saturnalia, were devoted to mu­

tual congratulations and the public joy; and the catholics prepared to
celebrate,

without a rival, the approaching festival of the nativity of Christ. In the
fami­

liar conversation of a hero, the Romans acquired some notion of the virtues
which

history ascribed to their ancestors; they were edified by the apparent respect
of

Belisarius for the successor of St. Peter, and his rigid discipline secured,
in the midst

of war, the blessings of tranquillity and justice. They applauded the rapid
success

of his arms, which overran the adjacent country, as far as Narni, Perusia, and
Spo-

leto: but they trembled, the senate, the clergy, and the unwarlike people, as
soon

as they understood that he had resolved, and would speedily be reduced to
sustain

a siege against the powers of the Gothic monarchy. The designs of Vitiges were

executed during the winter-season, with diligence and effect. From their
rustic

habitations, from their distant garrisons, the Goths assembled at Ravenna for
the

defence of their country; and such were their numbers, that after an army had

been detached for the relief of Dalmatia, one hundred and fifty thousand
fighting

men marched under the royal standard. According to the degrees of rank or me­

rit the Gothic king distributed arms and horses, rich gifts, and liberal
promises;

he moved along the Flaminian way, declined the useless sieges of Perusia and

Spoleto, respected the impregnable rock of Narni, and arrived within two miles

•of Rome, at the foot of the Milvian bridge. The narrow passage was fortified

with a tower, and Belisarius had computed the value of the twenty davs, which

must be lost in the construction of another bridge. But the consternation of
the

soldiers of the tower, who either fled or deserted, disappointed his hopes,
and

betrayed his person into the most imminent danger. At the head of one thousand

horse, the Roman general sallied from the Flaminian gate to mark the ground of
an

advantageous position, and to survey the camp of the barbarians; but while he
still

believed them on the other side of the Tiber, he was suddenly encompassed and

assaulted by their innumerable squadrons. The fate of Italy depended on his
life; and

the deserters pointed to the conspicuous horse, a bay,(3) with a white face,
which

he rode On that memorable day. " Aim at the bay horse," was the universal cry.

Every bow was bent, every javelin was directed, against that fatal object, and
the

command was'repeated and obeyed by thousands who were ignorant of its real

motive. The bolder barbarians_advanced to the more honourable combat of

-swords and spears; and the praise of an enemy has graced the fall of Visandus,  
the standard-bearer, (4) who maintained his foremost station, till he was
pierced

with thirteen wounds, perhaps by the hand of Belisarius himself. The Roman

general was strong, active, and dexterous: on every side he discharged his
weighty

(1) Bergier (Hist. Des Grands, Chemins des Romains, torn. i. p. 221—228.
440—444.) examines the structure

■and materials, while d'Anville (Analyse d'Ifalie. p. 200—213.) defines the
geographical line.

(2) Of the;first recovery of Rome, the year (536) is certain from the series
of events, rather than from the

corrupt, or interpolated, text of Procopius: the month (December is
ascertained by Evagrius; lib. It. c. 19.) and

the day (the tenth) may be admitted on the slight evidence of Nicephorus
Callisthus (lib. xvii. c. 13.) For this

accurate chronology, we are indebted to the diligence and judgment of Pagi
(torn. ii. p. 559,560.)

(3) A horse of a bay or red colour was styled eaXio; by the Greeks, balam by
the barbarians, and spadix by .

the Romans. Honesti spadices, says Virgil. (Georgic. lib. iii. 72. with the
observations of Martin and Heyne'.)

SjraS.t or signifies a branch of the palm tree, whose name ?oiv<?, is
synonymous to red (Aulus Gellius.

ii. 26.)

(4) I interpret 3«»J«>.«p«s, not as a proper name, but an office, standard
bearer from bandum (vexillum.) a

harbanc word adopted by the Greeks and Romans. (Paul Diacon, lib. i. e. SO. p,
760. Grot Nomina Gothi cs,

p. 575. Ducange, Gloss. Latin, Tom. i. p. 539,540.)

l

