THE DECLINE AND FALL

tiously renewed: the hopes of profit tempted the sacrilegious scribes to erase
the

characters of antiquity, and Sophocles or Tacitus were obliged to resign the
parch­

ment to missals, homdies, and the golden legend.^1) If such was the fate of
the

most beautiful compositions of genius, what stability could be expected for
the

dull and barren works of an obsolete science? The books of jurisprudence were

interesting to few, and entertaining to none; their value was connected with
pre­

sent use, and they sunk for ever as soon as that use was superseded by the
innova­

tions of fashion, superior merit, or public authority. In the age of peace and
learn­

ing, between Cicero and the last of the Antonines, many losses had been
already

sustained, and some luminaries of the school, or forum, were known only to the

curious by tradition and report. Three hundred and sixty years of disorder and

decay accelerated the progress of oblivion; and it may fairly be presumed,
that of

the writings, which Justinian is accused of neglecting, many were no longer to
be

found in the libraries of the east. (2) The copies of Papinian or Ulpian,
which the

, reformer had proscribed, were deemed unworthy of future notice; the twelve
ta­

bles, and pretorian edict insensibly vanished, and the monuments of ancient
Rome

were neglected or destroyed by the envy and ignorance of the Greeks. Even the

Pandects themselves have escaped with difficulty and danger from the common

shipwreck, and criticism has pronounced, that all the editions and manuscripts
of

the west are derived from one original. (3) It was transcribed at
Constantinople

the beginning of the seventh century,(4) was successively transported by the
acci­

dents of war and commerce to Amalphi,(5) Pisa,(6) and Florence,(7) and is now

deposited as a sacred relic(8) in the ancient palace of the republic. (9)

ft is the first care of a reformer to prevent any future reformation. To main­

tain the text of the Pandects, the Institutes, and the Code, the use of
ciphers and

abbreviations was rigorously proscribed; and as Justinian recollected, that
the per­

petual edict had been buried %nder the weight of commentators, he denounced

the punishment of forgery against the rash civilians who should presume to
inter­

pret or pervert the will of their sovereign. The scholars of Accursius, of
Barto-

lus, of Cujacius, should blush for their accumulated guilt, unless they dare
to dis­

pute his right of binding the authority of his successors, and the native
freedom of

the mind. But the emperor was unable to fix his own inconstancy; and while he

boasted of renewing the exchange of Diomede, of transmuting brass into
gold,(10)

copy was reduced from four or five hundred to sixty, fifty, and forty crowns.
The public was at first pleased

with the cheapness, and at length provoked by the discovery of the fraud.
(Mattaire, Anna).Typography torn,

i. p. 12. first edition.)

(1) This execrable practice prevailed from the eighth, and more especially
from the twelfth, century, when

it became almost universal (Montfaucon, in the Memoires de l'Academie, turn.
vi. p. 606, Etc. Bibliotheque

Raisonnee de la Diplomatique, torn, i, p. 170.)

(2) Poroponius f Pandect, lib. i. tit. ii. leg. ii.) observes, that of the
three founders of the civil law, Mucins,

Brutus, and Manilius, extant volumina, scripta Manilii monuments; that of some
old republican lawyers, haec

versantur eorum scripta intermanus hominum. Eight of the Augustan sages were
reduced to a compendium:

of Caseellius,scripta non extant sed unus liber, &c: of Trebatius, minus
frequentantur: of Tubero, libra pa-

rum grati sunt. Many quotations in the Pandects are derived from books which
Tribonian never saw; and in

the long period from the seventh to the thirteenth century of Rome, the
apparent reading of the moderns suc­

cessively depends on the knowledge and veracity of their predecessors.

(3) Ali, in several instances, repeat the errors of the scribe and the
transpositions of some leaves in the Flo­

rentine Pandects. This fact, if it be true, is decisive. Yet the Pandects are
quoted by Ivo of Chartres (who

died in 1117:) by Theobald, archbUhopof Canterbury, and by Vacariiis,ourfirst
professor, in the year 1140(Sel-

den ad Fhnam. c. 7. torn. ii. p. 1030—1085.) Have our British MSS. of the
Pandects been collated ?

(4) See the description of this original in Brenckman (Hist. Pandect. Florent.
lib. i. c. 2,3. p. 4—17. and lib. ii.)

Politian, an enthusiast, revered it as the authentic standard of Justinian
himself (p. 407,408.;) but this paradox

is refuted by the abbreviations of the Florentine MS. (lib. ii. c. 3, p.
it7—130.) It is composed of two quarto

volumes, with large margins, on a thin parchment, and the Latin characters
betray the hand of a Greek

scribe.

(5) Brenckman, at the end of his history, has inserted two dissertations on
the republic of Amalphi, and the

1 Pisan war in the year 1185, &c.

(6) The discovery of the Pandects at Amalphi (A. D. 1137.,) is first noticed
(in 1501) by Ludovicus Bologni-

nus (Brenckman, lib. i. c. 11. p. 73,74. lib. iv. c. 2. p. 417—425.) on the
faith of a Pisan chronicle (p. 409,410.,)

without a name or a date. The whole story, though unknown to the twelfth
century, embellished by igno­

rant ages, and suspected by rigid criticism, is not, however, destitute of
much internal probability (lib. i. c. 4—

a. p, 17—50.) The Liber Pandectarum of Pisa was undoubtedly consulted in the
fourteenth century by the

great Bartolus (p. 400,407. See lib. i. c. 9. p. 50—62.)

(7) Pisa was taken by the Florentines in the year 1406; and in 1411 the
Pandects were transported to the ca­

pital. These events are authentic and famous.

(8) They were now bound in purple,deposited in a rich casket,and shown to
curious travellers by the monks

and magistrates bare-headed, and with lighted tapers (Brenckman, lib. i. c.
10—12. p. 62—93.)

(9) After the collations of Politian, Bologninns and Antoninus Augustinus, and
the splendid edition of the

Pandects by Taurellus (in 1551.) Henry Brenckman, a Dutchman, undertook a
pilgrimage to Florence,where

he employed several years in the study of a single manuscript. His Historia
Pandectarum Flo rent inorum

(Utrecht, 1722, in quarto.) though a monument of industry, is a small portion
of hit original design.

(10) XpwKre* xxKkhwv ixaTOju&i tvvox&otwv apud Homerum patrem omnis virtlitis
(1st Pruefat. ad Pandect.) A

line of Milton or Ta«o would surprise us in an act of parliament. Quae omnia
obtinerc sancimus in omne

cevum. Of the first code, he jays (2d. Prrefat.,) in setemum valituruin. Man
and for ever!

