* OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 379

■beauty of the female captives, some of whom were afterwards sold for a
thousand

pieces of gold. The career, though not the zeal, of Akbah was checked by the

prospect of a boundless ocean. He spurred his horse into the waves, and
raising

his eyes to heaven, exclaimed with the tone of a fanatic—"Great God! if my

course were not stopped by this sea, I would still go on, to the unknown
kingdoms

of the west, preaching the unity of thy holy name, and putting to the sword
the

rebellious nations who worship any other gods than thee."(l) Vet this Mahome­

tan Alexander, who sighed for new worlds, was unable to preserve his recent
con­

quests. By the universal defection of the Greeks and Africans, he was recalled

from the shores of the Atlantic, and the surrounding multitudes left him only
the

resource of an honourable death. The last scene was dignified by an example of

national virtue. An ambitious chief, who had disputed the command and failed

in the attempt, was led about as a prisoner in the camp of the Arabian
general.

The insurgents had trusted to his discontent and revenge; he disdained their
offers

and revealed their designs. In the hour of danger, the grateful Akbah unlocked

his fetters, and advised him to retire; he chose to die under the banner of
his

rival. Embracing as friends and martyrs, they unsheathed their scimitars,
broke

their scabbards, and maintained an obstinate combat till they fell by each
other's

side on the last of their slaughtered countrymen. The third general or
governor

of Africa, Zobeir, avenged and encountered the fate of his predecessor. He
van­

quished the natives in many battles; he was overthrown by a powerful army,
which

Constantinople had sent to the. relief of Carthage.

It had been the frequent practice of the Moorish tribes to join the invaders,
to

share the plunder, to profess the faith, and to revolt to their savage state
of inde­

pendence and idolatry, on the first retreat or misfortune of the Moslems. The

prudence of Akbah had proposed to found an Arabian colony in the heart of

Africa; a citadel that might curb the levity of the barbarians, a place of
refuge to

secure, against the accidents of war, the wealth and the families of the
Saracens.

With this view, and under the modest title of the station of a caravan, he
planted

this colony in the fiftieth year of the Hegira. In its present decay,
Cairoan(2)

still holds the second rank in the kingdom of Tunis, from which it is distant
about

fifty miles to the south;(3) its inland situation, twelve miles westward of
the sea,

has protected the city from the Greek and Sicilian fleets. When the wild
beasts

and serpents were extirpated, when the forest, or rather wilderness, was
cleared,

the vestiges of a Roman town were discovered in a sandy plain: the vegetable
food

of Cairoan is brought from afar; and the scarcity of springs constrains the
inhabi­

tants to collect in cisterns and reservoirs a precarious supply of rain-water.
These

obstacles were subdued by the industry of Akbah; lie traced a circumstance of

three thousand and six hundred paces, which he encompassed with a brick wall;

in the space of five years, the governor's palace was surrounded with a
sufficient

number of private habitations; a spacious mosch was supported by five hundred

columns of granite, porphyry, and Numidian marble; and Cairoan became the

seat of learning as well as of empire. But these were the glories of a later
age;

the new colony was shaken by the successive defeats of Akbah and Zobeir, and

the western expeditions were again interrupted by the civil discord of the
Arabian

monarchy. The son of the valiant Zobeir maintained a war of twelve years, a

siege of seven months, against the house of Ommiyah. Abdallah was said to
unite

the fierceness of the lion with the subtlety of the fox; but if he inherited
the cou­

rage, he was devoid of the generosity of his father. (4)

The return of domestic peace allowed the caliph Abdalmalek to resume the

conquest of Africa; the standard was delivered to Hassan, governor of Egypt,
and

the revenue of that kingdom, with an army of forty thousand men, was conse-

(1) Otter (p. 119.) has given the strong tone of fiinaticiim to this
exclamation, which Cardonne (p. 37,) hat

softened to a pious wish of preaching the Koran. Yet they had both the same
text of Novairi before their eyes.

(2) The foundation of Cairoan is mentioned by Oekley; (Hist, of the Saracens,
vol. ii. p. 129,130.) and the si­

tuation, mosch, &c.of the city, are described by Leo Afric«nus.flbl. 75.)
Marmot, (torn. ii. p. 532.) and Shaw,

(p. 115.)

f3) A portentous, though frequent, mistake has been the confounding, from a
slight similitude of name, the

Cyrene of the Greeks, and the Cairoan of the Arabs, two cities which are
separated by an interval of a thousand

miles along the sea-coast. The great Thuonua has not escaped this fault, the
less excusable, as it is connected

with a formal and elaborate description of Africa. (Historiar. lib. vii. e. 2.
in torn. ii. p. 240. edit. Buckley.)

(4) Besides the Arabic chronicles of Abolfcda, Elmacin, and Abu!p:taragiils,
finder the seventy-third year of

the Hegira, we may consult d'Hrrbeiot.rBibtiot. Orient, p. 7.) and Oekley.
(Hist, of (he Saracens, vol. ii. p, 339

—349.) The latter has given the last and pathetic dialogue between Abflaliah
und h'.s mother; but he has forgot

a physical effect of her grief for his death, the retai n, at the age of
ninety, aud fatal consequences, of fier

menses.

