OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. ill

heads. (1) In a manly oration, not unworthy of a Roman censor, the eunuch re­

proved these disorderly vices, which sullied their fame, and endangered their

safety. The soldiers blushed and obeyed: discipline was confirmed, the
fortifica­

tions were restored; a duke was stationed for the defence and military command

of each of the principal cities;(2) and the eye of Narses pervaded the ample
pros­

pect from Calabria to the Alps. The remains of the Gothic nation evacuated the

country, or mingled with the people: the Franks, instead of revenging the
death

of Buccelin, abandoned, without a struggle, their Italian conquests: and the
re­

bellious Sindbal, chief of the Heruli, was subdued, taken, and hung on a lofty
gal­

lows by the inflexible justice of the exarch. (3) The civil state of Italy,
after the

agitation of a long tempest, was fixed by a pragmatic faction, which the empe­

ror promulgated at the request of the pope. Justinian introduced his own
Juris­

prudence into the schools and tribunals of the west: he ratified the acts of
Theo-

doric and his immediate successors, but every deed was rescinded and
abolished,

which force had extorted, or fear had subscribed, under the usurpation of
Totila.

A moderate theory was framed to reconcile the rights of property with the
safety

of prescription, the claims of the state with the poverty of the people, and
the

pardon of offences with the interest of virtue and order of society. Under the
ex­

archs of Ravenna, Rome was degraded to the second rank. Yet the senators

were gratified by the permission of visiting their estates in Italy, and of
approach­

ing without obstacle the throne of Constantinople; the regulation of weights
and

measures was delegated to the pope and senate; and the salaries of lawyers and

physicians, of orators and grammarians, were destined to preserve or rekindle
the

light of science in the ancient capital. Justinian might dictate benevolent
edicts,(4)

and Narses might second his wishes by the restoration of cities, and more
especial­

ly of churches. But the power of kings is most effectual to destroy: and the
twen­

ty years of the Gothic war had consummated the distress and depopulation of
Ita­

ly. As early as the fourth campaign, under the discipline of Belisarius
himself,

fifty thousand labourers died of hunger(5) in the narrow region of Picenum;(6)

and a strict interpretation of the evidence of Procopius would swell the loss
of Ita­

ly above the total sum of her present inhabitants. (7)

I desire to believe, but I dare not affirm, that Belisarius sincerely rejoiced
in the

triumph of Narses. Yet the consciousness of his own exploits might teach him
to

esteem without jealousy the merit of a rival; and the repose of the aged
warrior

was crowned by a last victory which saved the emperor and the capital. The

barbarians who annually visited the provinces of Europe were less discouraged
by

some accidental defeats, than they were excited by the double hope of spoil
and

of subsidy. In the thirty-second winter of Justinian s reign, the Danube was
deep­

ly frozen: Zabergan led the cavalry of the Bulgarians, and his standard was
fol­

lowed by a promiscuous multitude of Sclavonians. The savage chief passed with­

out opposition the river and the mountains, spread his troops over Macedonia
and

Thrace, and advanced with no more than seven thousand horse to the long walls

which should have defended the territory of Constantinople. But the works of

man are impotent against the assaults of nature: a recent earthquake had
shaken

the foundations of the wall; and the forces of the empire were employed on the

distant frontiers of Italy, Africa, and Persia. The seven schoola($) or
companies

(1) E\itito ystp c.;j*i, cutsis ujts u&iXrrftx; Tat; atr.TiSat; -ny^v kxi r»
xp*vn ay*C9fliw; otvov xati 5atp3«T3v etrcjoffjat,

(Agathias, lib. ii. p. 48. In the first scene of Richard III. our Enicliih
poet hat beautifully enlarged on thii

idea, for which, however, he was not Indebted to the Bvzantinc historian.

(2) Maffei hai proved (Verona Illastrata, p. 1. lib. x.'p. 257—380.,) against
the common opinion, that the

dukes of Italy were instituted before the conquest of the Lombards by Narses
himself. In the Pragmatic

Sanction (No. 23.) Justinian restrains the judices militares.

(3) See Pantus Diaconus, lib. iii. c. 2. p. 776. Menander (in Excerpt. Legat.
p. 133.) mentions some risings in

Italy by the Franks, and Theophanes (p. 201.) hints at some Gothic rebellions.

(4) The Pragmatic Sanction of Justinian, which restores and regulates the
civil state of Italy, consist* of

twenty-seven articles: it is dated August 15, A. D. 554; is addressed to
Narses, V. J. Propositus Sacri Cubiculi,

and to Antiochus) Praefectus Pnetono Italia:; and has been preserved by Julian
Antecessor, and in the Cor­

pus Juris Civilii, after the novels and edicts of Justinian, Justin, and
Tiberius,

(5) A still greater number was consumed by famine in the southern provinces,
without («to;) the Io­

nian gulf. Acorns were used in the place of bread. Procopius had seen a
deserted orphan suckled by a

she-goat. Seventeen passengers were lodged, murdered, and eaten by two women,
who were detected and

slain by the eighteenth, &e.

(6) Quinta regio Piceni est; quondam oberrimsB multitudinis, ccclx. millia
Picentium in fldem P. R.

venere (Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 18.) In the time of Vespasian, this ancient
population was already dimip

nislied.

(7) Perhaps fifteen or sixteen millions. Procopius (Anecdot. c. 18.) computes
that Africa lost five mil­

lions, that Italy was thrice as extensive, and that the depopulation was in a
larger proportion, fiut bia

reckoning is inflamed by passion, and clouded with uncertainty.

(I) In the decay of these military schools, the satire of Procopius (Anecdot.
c. xiv. Aleman. p. 102,103.) is.

confirmed and illustrated by Agathtas (lib. t. p. 159.) who cannot be rejected
as a hostile witness,

