OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 233

of marriage, the offices of humanity, were condemned as a deadly sin; the
natives

renounced all allegiance to the emperor; and his orders, at a distance from
Alex­

andria, were obeyed only under the pressure of military force. A generous ef­

fort might have redeemed the religion and liberty of Egypt, and her six
hundred

monasteries might have pbured forth their myraids of holy warriors, from whom

death should have no terrors, since life had no comfort or delight. But
experience

has proved the distinction of active and passive courage; the fanatic who
endures

without a groan the torture of the rack or the stake, would tremble and fly
before

the face of an armed enemy. The pusillanimous temper of the Egyptians could

only hope for a change of masters; the arms of Chosroes depopulated the land;

yet under his reign the Jacobites enjoyed a short and precarious respite. The
vic­

tory of Heraclius renewed and aggravated the persecution, and the patriarch
again

escaped from Alexandria to the desert. In his flight, Benjamin was encouraged

by a voice, which bade him expect at the end of ten years, the aid of a
foreign

nation, marked like the Egyptians themselves with the ancient rite of
circumci­

sion. The character of these deliverers, and the nature of the deliverance,
will

be hereafter explained; and I shall step over the interval of eleven centuries
to

observe the present misery of the Jacobites of Egypt. The populous city of
Cairo

affords a residence or rather a shelter for their indigent patriarch, and a
remnant

of ten bishops: forty monasteries have survived the inroads of the Arabs; and
the

Erogress of servitude and apostacy has reduced the Coptic nation to the
despica-

le number of twenty-five or thirty thousand families;(l) a race of illiterate
beg­

gars, whose only consolation is derived from the superior wretchedness of the

Greek patriarch and his diminutive congregation. (2)

VI. The Coptic patriarch, a rebel to the Cicsars, or a slave to the khalifs,
still

gloried in the filial obedience of the kings of Nubia and Ethiopia. He repaid
their ■

homage by magnifying their greatness; and it was boldly asserted that they
could

bring into the field a hundred thousand horse with an equal number of
camels;(3)

that their hand could pour out or restrain the waters of the Nile;(4) and the
peace

and plenty of Egypt was obtained, even in this world, by the intercession of
the

patriarch. In exile at Constantinople, Theodosius recommended to his patroness

the conversion of the black nations of Nubia,(5) from the tropic of Cancer to
the

confines of Abyssinia. Her design was suspected and emulated by the more or­

thodox emperor. The rival missionaries, a Melchite and a Jacobite, embarked

at the same time; but the empress, from a motive of love or fear, was more
effect­

ually obeyed; and the catholic priest was detained by the president of
Thebais,

while the king of Nubia and his court were hastily baptized in the faith of
Diosco-

rus. The tardy envoy of Justinian was received and dismissed with honour; but

when he accused the heresy and treason of the Egyptians, the negro convert was

instructed to reply that he would never abandon his brethren, the true
believers,

to the persecuting ministers of the synod of Chalcedon.(6) During several
ages,

the bishops of Nubia were named and consecrated by the Jacobite patriarch of

Alexandria: as late as the twelfth century, Christianity prevailed; and some
rites,

some ruins, are still visible in the savage towns of Sennaar and Dongola.(7)
But

(1) This number is taken from the curious Keeherches snr lei Egyptiens et les
Chinnis,(tom. ii. p. 192,193.)

and appears more probable than the six hundred thousand ancient, or fifteen
thousand modern, Copts of Ge-

melli Carreri. Cyril Lucar, the protestant patriarch of Constantinople,
laments that those heretics were ten

limes more numerous than his orthodox Greeks, ingeniously applying the jroaAa,
xsv Seiche; Ssmizto otvo^coto

of Humer, (Iliad. 2.128.) the most perfect expression of contempt. (Fabric.
Lux. Kvangelii, 740.)

(2) The history of the Copts, their religion, manners, &e. may be found in tbe
abbe Renaudot's motley

work, neither a translation nor an original; theChronicon Orientate of Peter)
a Jacubite; in the two versions

of Abraham Ecchelensis, Paris. 1651, and John Simon Asseman, Venet. 1720.
These annals descend no low­

er than the tbirteentb century.) The more recent accounts must be searched for
in the travellers into Egypt,

and the Nouveaux Memoires des Missions du Levant. In the last century, Joseph
Abudactins, a native of

Cairo, published at Oxford, in thirty pages, a slight Historia Jacobitarum,
147 post 150.

(3) About the year 737. See Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 221,222.
Elmacia, Hist. Saracen, p. 99.

(4) Ludolph. Hist. Atbiopic. et Co'nment. lib. i. c. viii. Renaudot. Hist.
Patriarch. Alex. 480, &c. This

opinion, introduced into Egypt and Europe by the artifice of the Copts, tbe
pride of the Abyssitiians, the fear

and ignorance of the Turks and Arahs, lias not even the semblance of truth.
The rains of ^Ethiopia do not,

in tbe increase of the lfile, consult the will of the monarch. If the river
approaches at Napata, within three

days1 journey of the Red Sea (see D*Anville's maps,} a canal that should
divert its course would demand, and

most probably surpass the power of the Caesars.

(5) The Abyssimans, who still preserve the features and olive complexion of
the Arabs, afford a proof that

two thousand years are not sufficient to change the colour of the human race.
The Nubians, and African

race, are pure negroes, as black as t hose of Senegal or Congo, with fiat
noses, thick lips, and woolly hair (Buf-

fon. Hist. Naturelle, torn. v. p. 117.143, 144. 160. 219. edit. 12mo. Paris,
1769.) The ancients beheld, without

much attention, the extraordinary phenomenon which has exercised the
philosophers and theologians of mo­

dern times.

(6) Asseman. Bibliot. Orient, torn. i. p. 329.

(7) The Christianity of the Nubians, A, D. 1153. is attested by the sheriff al
EJrisi, falsely described muler

Vol. Ill, 30

