22 THE DECLINE AND FALL

French philosopher(l) have demonstrated the possibility of such a mirror;
and,-

since it is possible, I am more disposed to attribute the art to the greatest
mathe­

maticians of antiquity, than to give the merit of the fiction to the idle
fancy of a

monk or a sophist. According to another story, Proclus applied sulphur to the

destruction of the Gothic fleet:(2) in a modern imagination, the name of
sulphur

is instantly connected with the suspicion of gunpowder, and that suspicion is
pro­

pagated by the secret arts of his disciple Anthemius. (3) A citizen of Tralles
in

Asia had five sons, who were all distinguished in their, respective
professions by

merit and success. Olympius excelled in the knowledge and practice of the Ro­

man jurisprudence. Diosconjs and Alexander became learned physicians; but

the skill of the former was exercised for the benefit of his fellow-citizens,
while

his more ambitious brothers acquired wealth and reputation at Rome. The fame

of Metrodorus the grammarian, and of Anthemius the mathematician and archi­

tect, reached the ears of the emperor Justinian, who invited them to
Constantino­

ple; and while the one instructed the rising generation in the schools of
eloquence,

the other filled the capital and provinces with more lasting monuments of his

art. In a trifling dispute, relative to the walls or windows of their
contiguous

hpuses, he had been vanquished by the eloquence of his neighbour Zeno; but the

orator was defeated in his turn by the master of mechanics, whose malicious,

though harmless stratagems, are darkly represented by the ignorance of Aga-

thias. In a lower room, Anthemius arranged several vessels, or cauldrons of
wa­

ter, each of them covered by the wide bottom of a leathern tube, which rose to

a narrow top, and was artificially conveyed among the joists and rafters of
the

adjacent building. A fire was kindled beneath the cauldron; the steam of the

boiling water ascended through the tubes; the house was shaken by the efforts
of

imprisoned air, and its trembling inhabitants might wonder that the city was
un­

conscious of the earthquake, which they had felt. At another time, the friends

of Zeno, as they sat at table, were dazzled by the intolerable light which
flashed

in their eyes from the reflecting mirrors of Anthemius; they were astonished
by

the noise which he produced from a collision of certain minute and sonorous
par­

ticles; and the orator declared, in tragic style to the senate, that a mere
mortal

must yield to the power of an antagonist, who shook the earth with the trident
of

Neptune, and imitated the thunder and lightning of-Jove himself. • The genius

of Anthemius and his colleague Isidore the Milesian, was excited and employed

by a prince, whose taste for architecture had degenerated into a mischievous
and

costly passion. His favourite architects submitted their designs and
difficulties to

Justinian, and discreetly confessed, how much their laborious meditation were

surpassed by the intuitive knowledge or celestial inspiration of an emperor,
whose

views were always directed to the benefit of his people, the glory of his
reign,

and the salvation of his soul. (4)

The principal church, which was dedicated by the founder of Constantinople

to St. Sophia, or the eternal Wisdom, had been twice destroyed by fire; after
the

exile of John Chrysostom, and during the Nika of the blue and green factions.

No sooner did the tumult subside, than the Christian populace deplored their
sa­

crilegious rashness: but they •might have rejoiced in the calamity, had they
fore­

seen the glory of the new temple, which at the end of forty days, was
strenuously

undertaken by the piety of Justinian. (5) The ruins were cleared away, a more

spacious plan was described, and, as it required the consent of some
proprietors

(1) Without anyj>revious knowledge of Tzetzes or Anthemius, the immortal
Buffon imagined and exe­

cuted a set of burning-glasses, with which he could inflame planks at the
distance of two hundred feet. Sup-

pleiwnt a 1'Hisr. Naiureile, torn. i. p. 389—483. quarto edition.) What
miracles would not his genius have

performed for the public serviee, with roval expense, and in the strong sun of
Constantinople or Syracuse!

(2) John Malala (torn. ii. p. 120—124.) relates the fact; but he seems to
confound the names or persons of

Proclus and Mavitius.

(3) Agathias, lib. v. p. 149—152. The merit of Anthemius as an architect, is
loudly praised by Frocopius,

(de Edit. lih. i. c. 1.) and Faulus Silentiarius. (part i. 134, &c.)

(4) SeeProcopius. (de Edifictis, lib. i. c. 1, 2. lib. ii. c. 3.) He relates a
coincidence of dreams which sup­

poses some fraud in Justinian or his architect. They both saw, in a vision,
the same plan for stopping an in­

undation at Data. A stone quarry near Jerusalem was revealed to the emperor:
(lib. v. c. 6.) an angel was

tricked into the perpetual custody of St. Sophia. .(Anonym, de Antiq. CP. lib.
iv. p. 70.)

(5) Among the ctowd of ancients and moderns, who have celebrated the edifice
of St. Sophia, I shall distin­

guish and follow,—1. Four original spectators and historians: Procopius, (de
Edific. lib. i. c. 1.) Agathias, (lib.

v. p. 152, 153.) Paul Sllentiarim, (in a poem of one thousand and twenty-six
hexameters, ad calcem Anna:

*Cumnem. Alexiad.) and Evagrius. (lib. iv. c. 31.) 2. Two legendary Greeks of a later period: George Codi-  
■nus, (de Origin. C. P. p?64—74.) and the anonymous writer of Banduri. (Imp.
Orient, torn. i. lib. iv. p. 65—80.)

3. The great Byzantine antiquarian Ducange. (Comment, ad Paul. Silentiar. p.
525—598. and C. P. Christ,

lib. iii. p. 5—78.) 4. Two French travellers—the one. Peter Gyllius (de
Topograph. C. P. lib. c. 3, 4.) in the

sixteenth; the other, Grelot: (Voyage de C. P. 95—164. Paris, 1680. in 4to.)
he has given plans, prospects, and

inside views of St. Sophia; and his plans, though on a smaller scale, appear
more correct than those of Du-

•cange. I have adopted and reduced the measure of Grelot: but as no Christian
can now ascend the dome, the

height is borrowed from EvagiUis,compared with Gyllius Greaves,and the
Oriental Geographer.

