THE DECLINE AND FALL

formidable tumult which lasted three days; they besieged the palace, forced
the

gates, recalled their mothers, Zoe from her prison, Theodora from her
monastery,

and condemned the son of Calaphates to the loss of his eyes or of his rife.
For

the first time, the Greeks beheld with surprise the two royal sisters seated
on the

same throne, presiding in the senate, and giving audience to the ambassadors
of

the nations. But this singular union subsisted no more than two months: the
two

sovereigns, their tempers, interests, and adherents, were secretly hostile to
each

other; and as Theodora was still averse to marriage, the indefatigable Zoe, at

the age of sixty, consented, for the public good, to sustain the embraces of a
third

husband, and the censures of the Greek church. His name and number were

Constantine X., and the epithet of Monomachus, the single combatant, must have

been expressive of his valour and victory in some public or private quarrel.
But

his health was broken by the tortures of the gout, and his dissolute reign was
spent

in the alternative of sickness and pleasure. A fair and noble widow had accom­

panied Constantine in his exile to.the isle of Lesbos, and Sclerena gloried in
the

appellation of his mistress. After his marriage and elevation, she was
invested

with the title and pomp of Augusta, and occupied a contiguous apartment in the

palace. . The lawful consort (such was the delicacy or corruption of Zoe)
consent­

ed to this strange and scandalous partition; and the emperor appeared in
public be­

tween his wife and his concubine. He survived them both; but the last measures

of Constantine to change the order of succession were prevented by the more
vi­

gilant friends of Theodora; and after his decease, she resumed, with the
general

consent, the possession of her inheritance. In her name, and by the influence
of

four eunuchs, the eastern world was peaceably governed about nineteen months;

and as they wished to prolong their dominion, they persuaded tTle aged
princess to

nominate for her successor Michael VI. The surname of Stratioticus declares

his military profession; but the crazy and decrepit veteran could only see
with the

eyes, and execute with the hands of his ministers. Whilst he ascended the
throne,

Theodora sunk into the grave; the last of the Macedonian or Basilian dynasty.
I

have hastily reviewed, and gladly dismiss, this shameful and destructive
period of

twenty-eight years, in which the Greeks, degraded below the common level of

servitude, were transferred like a herd of cattle by the choice or caprice
of'two

impotent females.

From this night of slavery, a ray of freedom, or at least of spirit, begins to

emerge: the Greeks either preserved or revived the use of surnames, which per­

petuate the fame of hereditary virtue; and we now discern the rise,
succession,

and alliance, of the last dynasties of Constantinople and Trebizond. The Com-

Tteni, who upheld for awhile the fate of the sinking empire, assumed the
honour

of a Roman origin: but the family had been long since transported from Italy
to

Asia. Their patrimonial estate was situate in the district of Castamona, in
the

neighbourhood of the Euxine; and one of their chiefs, who had already entered

the paths of ambition, revisited with affection, perhaps with regret, the mo­

dest though honourable dwelling of his fathers. The first of their line was
the

illustrious Manuel, who, in the reign of the second Basil, contributed by war
and

treaty, to appease the troubles of the east: he left, in a tender age,
twosons, Isaac

and John, whom, with the consciousness of desert, he bequeathed to the
gratitude

and favour of his sovereign. The noble youths were carefully trained in the
learn­

ing of the monastery, the arts of the palace, and the exercises of the camp;
and

from the domestic service of the .guards, they were rapidly promoted to the
com­

mand of provinces and armies. Their fraternal union doubled the force and re­

putation of Comneni, and their ancient nobility was illustrated by the
marriage of

the two brothers with a captive princess of Bulgaria, and the daughter of a
patri­

cian, who had obtained the name of Charon, from the number of enemies whom

he had sent to the infernal shades. The soldiers had served with reluctant
loyal­

ty a series of effeminate masters; the elevation of Michael VI. was a personal
in­

sult to the more deserving generals; and their discontent was inflamed by the
par­

simony of the emperor and the insolence of the eunuchs. They secretly assem­

bled in the sanctuary of St. Sophia, and the votes of the military synod would
have

been unanimous in favour of the old and valiant Catacalon, if the patriotism
or

modesty of the veteran had not suggested the importance of birth as well as
me­

rit in the choice of a sovereign. Isaac Comnenusnvas approved by general con­

sent, and the associates separated without delay to meet in the plains of
Phrygia

at the head of their respective squadrons and detachments. The cause of "Mi­

chael was defended in a sipgle battle by the mercenaries of the imperial
guard,

who were aliens to the public interest, and animated only by a principle of
honour

