90 THE DECLINE AND FALL

rations, both of the attack and defence, were conducted with skilful
obstinacy; and

each party derived useful lessons from the experience of their past faults. A
bat­

tering ram was invented, of light construction and powerful effect; it was
trans­

ported and worked by the hands of forty soldiers; and as the stones were
loosened

by its repeated strokes, they were torn with long iron hooks from the wall.
From

those walls, a shower of darts was incessantly poured on the heads of the
assailants;

but they were most dangerously annoyed by a fiery composition of sulphur and
bi­

tumen, which in Colehos might, with some propriety, be named the oil of Medea,

Of six thousand Romans who mounted the scaling-ladders, their general Bessas

was the first, a gallant veteran of seventy years of age: the courage of their
leader,

his fall, and extreme danger, animated the irresistible efforts of his troops;
and

their prevailing numbers oppressed the strength, without subduing the spirit,
of

the Persian garrison. The fate of these valiant men deserves to be more
distinctly

noticed. Seven hundred had perished in the siege; two thousand three hundred

survived to defend the breach. One thousand and seventy were destroyed with

fire and sword in the last assault; and if seven hundred and thirty were made
pri­

soners, only eighteen among them were found without the marks of honourable

wounds. The remaining five hundred escaped-into the citadel, which they main­

tained without any hopes of relief, rejecting the fairest terms of
capitulation and

service, till they were lost in the flames. They died in obedience to the
commands

of their prince; and such examples of loyalty and valour might excite their
coun­

trymen to deeds of equal despair and more prosperous event. The instant demo­

lition of the works of Petra confessed the astonishment and apprehension of
the

conqueror.

A Spartan would have praised and pitied the virtue of these heroic slaves; but

the tedious warfare and alternate success of the Roman and Persian arms cannot

detain the attention of posterity at the foot of mount Caucasus. The
advantages

obtained by the troops of Justinian were more frequent and splendid; but the
forces

of the great king were continually supplied, till they amounted to eight
elephants

and seventy thousand men, including twelve thousand Scythian allies, and above

three thousand Dilemites, who descended by their free choice from the hills of

Hyrcania, and were equally formidable in close or in distant combat. The siege

of Archseopolis, a name imposed or corrupted by the Greeks, wasraised with
some

loss and precipitation; but the Persians occupied the passes of Iberiar
Colehos was

enslaved by their forts and garrisons; they devoured the scanty sustenance of
the

people; and the prince of the Lazi fled into the mountains. In the Roman camp

faith and discipline were unknown; and the independent leaders, who were
invest­

ed with equal power, disputed with each other the pre-eminence of vice and
cor­

ruption. The Persians followed without a murmur the commands of a single
chief,

who implicitly obeyed the instructions of their supreme lord. Their general
was

distinguished among the heroes of the east by his wisdom in council, and his
valour

in the field. The advanced age of Mermeroes, and the lameness of both his
feet,

could not diminish the activity of his mind, or even of his body; and whilst
he

was carried in a litter in the front of battle, he inspired terror to the
enemy, and a

just confidence to the troops, who, under his banners, were always successful.
Af­

ter his death, the command devolved to Nacoragan, a proud satrap, who, in con­

ference with the inferior chiefs, had presumed to declare that he disposed of
victo­

ry as absolutely as of the ring on his finger. Such presumption was the
natural

cause and forerunner of a shameful defeat. The Romans had been gradually re­

pulsed to the edge of the sea-shore; and their last camp, on the ruins of the
Gre­

cian colony of Phasis, was defended on all sides by strong intrenchments, the
river,

the Euxine, and a fleet of galleys. Despair united their councils and
invigorated

their arms; they withstood the assaults of the Persians; and the flight of
Nacoragan

preceded or followed the slaughter of ten thousand of his bravest soldiers. He
es­

caped from the Romans to fall into the hands of an unforgiving master, who
severe­

ly chastised the error of his own choice; the unfortunate general was flayed
alive, and

his skin, stuffed into the human form, was exposed on a mountain; a dreadful
warn­

ing to those who might hereafter be intrusted with the fame and fortune of
Per­

sia. (1) Yet the prudence of Chosroes insensibly relinquished the prosecution
of

the Colchian war, in the just persuasion that it is impossible to reduce, or
at least

to hold, a distant country against the wishes and efforts of its inhabitants.
The

% (l) The punishment of flaying alive pould not be introdnced into Persia by
Sapor (BrisondeRegn. Pen. lib.

h. p. 578.,) nor coo Id it be copied from the foolish tale of Marsyai, the
Phrygian piper, most foolishly quoted a»

a precedent by Agatbias, (lib. iy. p. US, 13S.)

