OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

Jnarcand, with the Turkish tribes of Sogdiana and Scythia, were moved by the
la­

mentations and promises of the fallen monarch; and he solicited, by a
suppliant

embassy, the more solid and powerful friendship of the emperor of China. (1)
The

virtuous Taitsong,(2) the first of the dynasty of the Tang, may be justly
compared

with the Antonines of Rome: his people enjoyed the blessings ot prosperity and

peace; and his dominion was acknowledged by forty-four hordes of the
barbarians

of Tartary. His last garrisons of Cashgar and Khoten maintained a frequent in­

tercourse with their neighbours of the Jaxartes and Oxus; a recent colony of
Per­

sians had introduced into China, the astronomy of the Magi; and Taitsong might

be alarmed by the rapid progress and dangerous vicinity of the Arabs. I'he in­

fluence, and perhaps the supplies of China, revived the hopes of Yezdegerd and

the zeal of the worshippers of fire; and he returned with an army of Turks to

conquer the inheritance of his fathers. The fortunate Moslems, without un­

sheathing their swords, were the spectators of his ruin and death., The
grandson

of Chosroes was betrayed by his servant, insulted by the seditious inhabitants
of

Merou, and oppressed, defeated, and pursued by his barbarian allies. He
reached

the banks of a river, and offered his rings and bracelets for an instant
passage in

a miller's boat. Ignorant or insensible of royal distress, the rustic replied,
that

four drachms of silver were the daily profit of his mill, and that he would
not sus­

pend his work unless the loss were repaid. In this moment of hesitation and
de­

lay, the last of the Sassanian kings was overtaken and slaughtered by the
Turkish

cavalry, in the nineteenth year of his unhappy reign. (3) His son Firuz, an
hum­

ble client of the Chinese emperor, accepted the station of captain of his
guards;

and the Magian worship was long preserved by a colony of loyal exiles in the
pro­

vince of Bucharia. His grandson inherited the regal name; but after a faint
and

fruitless enterprise, he returned to China, and ended his days in the palace
of Si-

gan. The male line of the Sassanides was extinct; but the female captives, the

daughters of Persia, were given to the conquerors in servitude, or marriage;
and

the race of the caliphs and imams was ennobled by the blood of their royal mo­

thers. (4)

After the fall of the Persian kingdom, the river Oxus divided the territories
of

the Saracens and of the Turks. This narrow boundary was soon overleaped by

the spirit of the Arabs: the governors of Chorasan extended their successive
in­

roads; and one of their triumphs was adorned with the buskin of a Turkish
queen,

which she dropped in her precipitate flight beyond the hills of Bochara.(5)
But

the final conquest of Transoxiana,(6) as well as of Spain, was reserved for
the

glorious reign of the inactive Walid; and the name of Catiliah, the camel
driver,

declares the origin and merit of his successful lieutenant. While one of his
col­

leagues displayed the first Mahometan banner on the banks of the Indus, the

spacious regions between the Oxus, the Jaxartes and the Caspian sea, were re­

duced by the arms of Catibah to the obedience of the prophet, and of the ca­

liph. (J) A tribute of two millions of pieces of gold was imposed on the
infidels;

their idols were burnt or broken; the Mussulman chief pronounced a sermon in

the new mosch of Carizme; after several battles, the Turkish-hordes were
driven

back to the desert; and the emperors of China solicited the friendship of the
vic­

torious Arabs. To their industry, the prosperity of the province, the Sogdiana

(1) Eo redegit angustiarum eundum regem exsnlem, lit Torcici regis et
Sogdianr, et Sinensis, auxilia missis

literis itnploraret. (Abtrlfrtl. Annal. p. 74.) The connexion of (he Persian
and Chinese history is illustrated by

Freret, Mem. de P AcsuVmie. torn. xvi. p. 245—255.) and de Guignes. (Hist, des
Huns, torn. ii. p. 54—55. ana

for the geography of the borders, torn. ii. p. 1—43.)

(2) Hist. Sinica, p. 41—46. in the thiitl part of the Relations Curieuses of
Th* venot.

(3J I have endeavoured to harmonize the various narrarives of Rlmacin. (Hist.
Saracen, p. 37.) Abulphara-

gios, (Dynast, p. 116.) Abuifeda, (Annal. p. 74.79.) and d'Herbelot. (p. 485.)
The end of Yezdegerd was not

only unfortunate but obscure.

(4) The rwo daughter! of Yt-zdegcrd married Hassan, the son of Ali, and
Mohammed, the son of Ahnbeker;

and the first of these was the father of a numerous projreny. The daughter of
Phirouz became the wife of thu

caliph Walid, and their son Yt-zid derived his genuine or fabulous descent
from the Chosroes of Persia, the Cte-

sars of Rome, and the Chagans of the Turks or Avars. (D'Herbelot, Bibliot.
Orientale, p. 96. 437.)

(5) It was valued at two thousand pieces of gold, and was rhe prize of
Obeidollah, the son of Ziyad, a name

afterward infamous bj the murder of Hosein. (Ockley's History of the Saracens,
vol. ii. p. 142, 143.) His bro­

ther Salem was accompanied by his wife, the first Arabian woman (A. D. 680.)
who passed the Oxus: she bor­

rowed, or rather stole, the crown and .jewels of the princess of the
Sogtlians. (231,232.)

(6) A part of Abulfeda's geography is translated by Greaves, inserted in
Hudson's collection of the minor geo­

grapher*, (torn, iii.) and emitted, Deseriptio Chorasmifeet Mamaralnahrce, id
esr, regionum extra fiuvium,

Oxutn, p. 80. The name of Tramaxiana, softer in sound, equivalent in sense, is
aptly used bv Petit de la Croix,

(Hist, de Gengiscan, 8tc.) and some modern Orientalists; but they are mistaken
in ascribing it to the writers of

antiquity.

(7) The conquests of Catibah are faintly marked by Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen, p.
84.) d'Herbelot, (Bibliot.

Orient. Catbah, Samaramd, Vulid) and tie Gnignea, Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p.
53, 59.)

Vol. TIT. 45

