OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. S7

and mortal strokes: his faithful guards imitated his valour, and defended his
per­

son; and the Goths, after the loss of a thousand men, fled before the arms of
a

hero. They were rashly pursued to their camp; and the Romans, oppressed by

multitudes, made a gradual, and at length a precipitate retreat to the gates
of the

city; the gates were shut against the fugitives; and the public terror was
increased

by the report that Belisarius was slain. His countenance was indeed disfigured

by sweat, dust, and blood; his voice was hoarse, his strength was almost
exhausted,

but his unconquerable spirit still remained; he imparted that spirit to his
despond­

ing companions; and their last desperate charge was felt by the flying
barbarians;

as if a new army, vigorous and entire, had been poured from the city. The Fla-

minian gate was thrown open to a real triumph; but it was not before
Belisarius

had visited every post, and provided for the public safety, that he could be
per­

suaded by his wife and friends, to taste the needful refreshments of food and
sleep.

In the more improved state of the art of war, a general is seldom required, or

even permitted, to display the personal prowess of a soldier; and the example
of

Belisarius may be added to the rare examples of Henry IV. of Pyrrhus and of

Alexander.

After this first and unsuccessful trial of their enemies, the whole army of
the

Goths passed the Tiber, and formed the siege of the city, which continued
above

a year, till their final departure. Whatever fancy may conceive, the severe
com­

pass of the geographer defines the circumference of Rome within a line of
twelve

miles and three hundred and forty-five paces; and that circumference, except
in

the Vatican, has invariably been the same from the triumph of Aurelian to the

peaceful but obscure reign of the modern popes.(l) But in the day of her
great­

ness, the space within her walls was crowded with habitations and inhabitants;

and the populous suburbs, that stretched along the public roads, were darted
like

so many rays from one common centre. Adversity swept away these extraneous

ornaments, and left naked and desolate a considerable part even of the seven
hills.

Yet Rome, in its present state, could send into the field above thirty
thousand

males, of a military age;(2) and, notwithstanding the want of discipline and
ex­

ercise, the far greater part inured to the hardships of poverty, might be
capable

of bearing arms for the defence of their country and religion. The prudence of

Belisarius did not neglect this important resource. His soldiers were relieved
by

the zeal and diligence of the people, who watched while they slept, and
laboured

w.hile they reposed; he accepted the voluntary service of the bravest and most
in­

digent of the Roman youth; and the companies of townsmen sometimes represent­

ed, in a vacant post, the presence of the troops which had been drawn away to

more essential duties. But his just confidence was placed in the veterans who
had

4fought under his banner in the Persian and African wars; and although that
gallant

band was reduced to five thousand men, he undertook, with such contemptible

numbers, to defend a circle of twelve miles, against an army of one hundred
and

fifty thousand barbarians. In the walls of Rome, which Belisarius constructed
or

restored, the materials of ancient architecture may be discerned;(3) and the

■whole fortification was completed, except in a chasm still extant between the

Pincian and Flaminian gates, which the prejudices of the Goths and Romans left

under the effectual guard of St. Peter the apostle. (4) The battlements or
bas­

tions were shaped in sharp angles; a ditch, broad and deep, protected the foot
of

the rampart: and archers on the rampart were assisted by military engines—the

balista, a powerful cross-bow, which darted short but massy arrows; the
onagri,.

or wild asses, which, on the principle of a sling, threw stones and bullets of
an

enormous size.(5) A chain was drawn across the Tiber; the arches of the aque-

(1) M. d'Anville has given in the MemoirPS of the Academy for the year 1750,
(torn. xxx. p. 198—236.) a plan

of Rome on ft smaller scale, but far more accurate than that which he had
delineated in 1738 for Rolling his­

tory. Experience had improved his knowledge: and instead of Rossi's
topography, he used t he new and ex­

cellent map of Nolli. Pliny's old measure of thirteen must be reduced to
eighteen miles. It is easier to alter

a text, than to remove hills or buildings.

(2) In the year 1709, Labat (Voyages en Italie, torn. iii. p. 218.) reckoned
one hundred and thirty-eight thou­

sand five hundred and sixty-eight Christian souls, besides eight or ten
thousand Jews—without souls! In the

year 1763, the numbers exceeded one hundred and sixty thousand.

(3) The accurate eye of Nardini (Uoma Antica, lib. i. c. 8. p. 31.) could
distinguish the turaultuarie opera di

Beiisario.

(4) The fissure and leaning in the tipper part of the wail, which Frocopius
observed, (Goth. lib. i. c. IS.) is

•visible to the present hour. (Donat. Roma Vetus, lib. i. c. 17. p. 53, 54.)

(5) Lijtoius (Opp. torn. iii. Poliorcet. lib. iii.) was ignorant of this clear
and conspicuous passage of Procopius.

(Goth. lib. i. c. 21.) The engine was named owevpo?, the wild ass, a
calcitrando. (Hen. Steph. Tbesaur. Lin­

gua; Gnec torn. ii. p. 1340,1341. torn. iii. p. 877.) I have seen an ingenious
model, contrived and execute;! by

General Melville, which imitates or surpasses tha art of amiquitv.

Vol. III. 8

