318 THE DECLINE AND FALL

even the head of the murderer, substitutes an innocent to the guilty person,
and

transfers the penalty to the best and most considerable of the race by whom
they

have been injured. If he falls by their hands, they are exposed in their turn
to

the danger of reprisals, the interest and principal of the bloody debt are
accumu­

lated; the individuals of either family lead a life of malice and suspicion,
and fifty

years may sometimes elapse before the account of vengeance be finally settled.
(1)

This sanguinary spirit, ignorant of pity or forgiveness, has been moderated,
how­

ever, by the maxims of honour, which require in every private encounter some
de­

cent equality of age and strength, of numbers and weapons. An annual festival

of two, perhaps of four, months, was observed by the Arabs before the time of

Mahomet, during which their swords were religiously sheathed both in foreign
and

domestic hostility; and this partial truce is more strongly expressive of the
habits

of anarchy and warfare. (2)

But the spirit of rapine and revenge was attempered by the milder influence of

trade and literature. The solitary peninsula is encompassed by the most
civilized na­

tions of the ancient world: the merchant is the friend of mankind: and the
annual ca­

ravans imported the first seeds of knowledge and politeness into the cities,
and even

the camps, of the desert. Whatever may be the pedigree of the Arabs, their
lan­

guage is derived from the same original stock of the Hebrew, the Syriac, and
the

Chaldean tongues; the independence of the tribes was marked by their peculiar
dia­

lects;^) but each, after their own, allowed a just preference to the pure and
perspi­

cuous idiom of Mecca. In Arabia as well as in Greece, the perfection of
language

outstripped the refinement of manners; and her speech could diversify the
fourscore

names of honey, the two hundred of a serpent, the five hundred of a lion, the
thou­

sand of a sword, at a time when this copious dictionary was intrusted to the
memo­

ry of an illiterate people. The monuments of the Homerites were inscribed with
an

obsolete and mysterious character; but the Cufic letters, the groundwork of
the pre­

sent alphabet, were invented on the banks of the Euphrates; and the recent
inven­

tion was taught at Mecca by a stranger who settled in that city after the
birth of Ma­

homet. The arts of grammar, of metre, and of rhetoric, were unknown to the
free-

born eloquence of the Arabians; but their penetration was sharp, their fancy
luxu­

riant, their wit strong and sententious,(4) and their more elaborate
compositions were

addressed with energy and effect to the minds of their hearers. The genius and

merit of a rising poet were celebrated by the applause of his own and the
kindred

tribes. A solemn banquet was prepared, and a chorus of women, striking their
tym-

bals, and displaying the pomp of their nuptials, sung in the presence of their
sons

and husbands the felicity of their native tribe; that a champion had now
appeared

to vindicate their rights; that a herald had raised his voice to immortalize
their

renown. The distant or hostile tribes resorted to an annual fair, which was
abolish­

ed by the fanaticism of the first Moslems; a national assembly, that must have

contributed to refine and harmonize the barbarians. Thirty days were employed

in the exchange, not only of com and wine, but of eloquence and poetry. The

prize was disputed by the generous emulation of the bards; the victorious per­

formance was deposited in the archives of princes and emirs, and we may read,
in

our own language, the seven original poems which were inscribed in letters of

gold, and suspended in the temple of Mecca. (5) The Arabian poets were the
his­

torians and moralists of the age; and if they sympathized with the prejudices,
they

inspired and crowned the virtues, of their countrymen. The indissoluble union
of

(1) The modem theory and practice of the Arabs in the revenge of murder, are
described by Neibnhr (Be*

scriptiou, p. 26—310 The harsher features of antiquity may be traced in the
Koran, c. ii. p. 20. e. xvii. p. 330,

with Sale's observations.

; (2) Procopius (de Bell. Persic, lib. i. e. 160 places the two holy months
about the summer solstice. .The Ara­

bians consecrate/our months of the year—the first, seventh, eleventh, and
twelfth; and pretend, thatin a long

series of ages, the truce was infringed only four or sin times (Sale's
Preliminary Discourse, p. 147—140. and

Tfotes on the ninth chapter of the Koran, p. 154, fcc. Casiri, Bibliot.
Hispano-Arabica, torn. ii. p. 20, 21.)

(3) Arrian, in the second century, remarks (in Peripio Maris Erythrsei, p.
12.) the partial or total difference

■of the dialects of the Arabs. Their language and letters are copiously
treated by Pocock (Specimen, p. 150—

154,) Casiri (Bibliot. Hispano-Arabica. torn. i. p. 1. 83. 292. torn. ii. p.
25, &c.,) and Neibuhr. (Description de

I'Arabie.p. 72—86.) I pass slightly; I am not fond of repeating words like a
parrot.

(4) A familiar tale in Voltaire's Zadig (le Chien et le Cheval) is related to
prove the natural sagacity of the

Arabs (d'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient, p. 120,121. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn.
i. p. 37—46,) but d'Arvieux, or

rather La Roque (Voyage de Palestine, p. 92,) denies the boasted superiority
of the Bedoweens. The one bund*

red and sixty-nine sentences of Ali (translated by Ockley, London, 1718,)
afford a just and favourable specimen

of Arabian wit.

(5) Pocock (Specimen, p. 158—161.) and Casiri (Bibliot. Hispano-Arabica, torn.
i. p. 48, 84, &c. 119. torn. ii.

p. 17, &c.) speak of the Arabian poets before Mahomet; the seven poems of the
Caaba have been published in

English by sir William Jones; but his honourable mission to India has deprived
us of his own notes, far mow

