OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 4?

of Solomon,(l) which he repeatedly pronounced, " Vanity! vanity! all is
vanity!"

Instead of ascending a triumphal car drawn by four horses or elephants, the
mo­

dest conqueror marched on foot at the head of his brave companions; his
prudence

might decline an honour too conspicuous for a subject;-and his magnanimity
might

justly disdain what had been so often sullied by the vilest of tyrants. The
glorious

procession entered the gate of the hippodrome; was saluted by the acclamations

of the senate and people; and halted before the throne where Justinian and
Theo­

dora were seated to receive the homage of the captive monarch and the
victorious

hero. They both performed the customary adoration; and, falling prostrate -on

the ground, respectfully touched the footstool of a prince who had not
unsheathed

his sword, and of a prostitute who had danced on the theatre: some gentle
violence

was used to bend the stubborn spirit of the grandson of Genseric; and, however

trained to servitude, the genius, of Belisarius must have secretly rebelled.
He

was immediately declared consul for the ensuing year, and the day of his in­

auguration resembled the pomp of a second triumph; his curule chair was borne

aloft on the shoulders of captive Vandals; and the spoils of war, gold cups,
and

rich girdles, were profusely scattered among the populace.

But the purest reward of Belisarius was in the faithful execution of a treaty,
for

which his honour had been pledged to the king of the Vandals. The religious

scruples of Gelimer, who adhered to the Arian heresy, were incompatible with

the dignity of senator or patrician; but he received from the emperor an ample
es­

tate in the province of Galatia, where the abdicated monarch retired with his
fa­

mily and friends, to a life of peace, of affluence, and perhaps of content.
(2) Th6

daughters of Hilderic were entertained with the respectful tenderness due to
their

age and misfortune; and Justinian and Theodora accepted the honour of
educating

and enriching the female descendants of the great Theodosius. The bravest of
the

Vandal youth were distributed into five squadrons of cavalry, which adopted
the-

name of their benefactor, and supported in the Persian wars the glory of their
an­

cestors. But these rare exceptions, the reward of birth or valour, are
insufficient

to explain the fate of a nation, whose numbers, before a short and bloodless
war,

amounted to more than six hundred thousand persons. After the exile of their

king and nobles, the servile crowd might purchase their safety, by abjuring
their cha­

racter, religion, and language; and their degenerate posterity would be
insensibly

mingled with the common herd of African subjects. Yet even in the present age,

and in the heart of the Moorish tribes, a curious traveller ha* discovered the
white

complexion and long flaxen hair of a northern race;(3) and it was formerly
believed,

that the boldest of the Vandals fled beyond the power, or even the knowledge
of

the Romans, to enjoy their solitary freedom on the shores of the Atlantic
ocean. (4)

Africa had been their empire, it became their prison; nor could they entertain
a

hope, or even a wish,-of returning to the banks of the Elbe, where their
brethren,

of a spirit less adventurous, still wandered in their native forests. It was
impossi­

ble for cowards to surmount the barriers of unknown seas and hostile
barbarians :

it was impossible for brave men to expose their nakedness and defeat before
the

eyes of their countrymen, to describe the kingdoms which they had lost, and to

claim a share of the humble inheritance, which, in a happier hour, they had
al­

most unanimously renounced. (5) In the country between the Elbe and the Oder
se­

veral populous villages of Lusatia are inhabited by the Vandals: they still
preserve

their language, their customs, and the purity of their blood; support, with
some

impatience, the Saxon, or Prussian yoke; and serve with secret and voluntary

allegiance, the descendant of their ancient kings, who in his garb and present

(1) If the Ecclesiastics be truly a work of Solomon, and not, like Prior's
poem, a pious and moral composi­

tion of more recent times, in his name, and on the subject of his repentance.
The latter is the opinion of the

learned and free spirited Grotitii (Opp. Theolog. torn. i. p. 258.:) and
indeed the Ecclesiastics and Proverb*,

display a larger compass of thought and experience than seem to belong either
to a Jew or a king.

(2) In the BeHsaire of Marmontel, the king and the conqueror of Africa meet,
sup, and convene, without

recollecting each other. It is surely a fault of that romance, that not only
the hero, but all to whom he had

been so conspicuously known, appear to have lost their eyes or their memory.

(3) Shaw, p. 59. Yet since Procopius (lib. ii. c. 13.) speaks of a people of
Mount Atlas, as already distin­

guished by white bodies and yellow hair, the phenomenon (which is likewise
visible in the Andes of Peru.

Buffon,tom. iii. p. 504.) may naturally be ascribed to the elevation of the
ground, and the temperature of

the air.

(4) The geographer of Havenna (lib. iii. c. 11. p. 129—131. Paris, 1681.)
describes the Mauritania Cadilena

opposite to Cadiz,) ubi gens Vandalorum, a Belisario devicta in Africa, f ugit
et nunquara comparuit.

(5) A single voice had protested, and Genseric dismissed, without a formal
answer, the Vandals of Germany*

but those of Africa derided his prudence, and affected to despise the poverty
of their forests (Procopius, Van­

dal, lib. i. c. 32.)

