OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

voice the praises of Jupiter and those of Christ. But the evidence of his
destruc­

tive rage is doubtful and recent; the temple of peace, or the theatre of
Marcellus,

have been demolished by the slow operation of ages, and a formal proscription

would have multiplied the copies of Virgil and Livy in the countries which
were

not subject to the ecclesiastical dictator. (1)

Like Thebes, or Babylon, or Carthage, the name of Rome might have been

erased from the earth, if the city had not been animated by a vital principle,
which

again restored her to honour and dominion. A vague tradition was embraced,

that two Jewish teachers, a tent-maker and a fisherman, had formerly been exe­

cuted In the circus of Nero, and at the end of five hundred years their
genuine or

fictitious relics were adored as the Palladium of Christian Rome. The pilgrims

of the east and west resorted to the holy threshold; but the shrines of the
apostles

were guarded by miracles and invisible terrors; and it was not without fear
that

the pious catholic approached the object of his worship. It was fatal to
touch, it

was dangerous to behold, the bodies of the saints; and those who, from the
purest

motives, presumed to disturb the repose of the sanctuary, were affrightened by

visions, or punished with sudden death. The unreasonable request of an empress

who wished to deprive the Romans of their sacred treasure, the head of St4
Paul,

was rejected with the deepest abhorrence; and the pope asserted, most probably

with truth, that a linen which had been sanctified in the neighbourhood of his
body,

or the filings of his chain, which it was sometimes easy and sometimes
impossible

to obtain, possessed an equal degree of miraculous virtue. (2) But the power
as

well as virtue of the apostles resided with living energy in the breasts of
their suc­

cessors; and the chair of St. Peter was filled under the reign of Maurice by
the

first and greatest of the name of Gregory.(5) His grandfather Felix had
himself

been pope, and as the bishops were already bound by the law of celibacy, his
con­

secration must have been preceded by the death of his wife. The parents of
Gre­

gory, Sylvia and Gordian, were the noblest of the senate, and the most pious
of

the church of Rome: his female relations were numbered among the saints and

virgins; and his own figure with those of his father and mother were
represented

near three hundred years in a family portrait, (4) which he offered to the
monas­

tery of St. Andrew. The design and colouring of this picture afford an
honoura­

ble testimony, that the art of painting was cultivated bv the Italians of the
sixth

century; but the most abject ideas must be entertained of their taste and
learning,

since the epistles of Gregory, his sermons, and his dialogues, are the work of
a man

who was second in erudition to none of his cotemporariesi(5) his birth and
abilities

had raised him to the office of prefect of the city, and he enjoyed the merit
of re­

nouncing the pomp and vanities of this world. His ample patrimony was dedi­

cated to the foundation of seven monasteries, (6) one in Rome, (7) and six in
Sicily:

(1) Bayle (Dictiniuire Critiaut, torn. ii. p. J98,599.,) in n very- good
article of Gregoire I. has quoted for

the buildings and statues, Platina in Gregorio I. for the Palatine library,
John of Salisbury (de Nutria

Curialium, lib. ii. c. 30.,) and for Livy, Antoninus of Florence; the oldest
of the three lived in the twelfth

century.

(2) Gregor, lib. iii. epist, 84. edict. 12, Sec. From the epistles of Gregory,
and his eighth volume of the An-

rials of Baronitis, the pious reader may collect the particles of holy iron
which were inserted in keys or crosses

of gold, and distributed in Britain, Gaul, Spain, Africa, Constantinople, and
Egypt. The pontifical smith

who handled the file must have understood the miracles which it was in his own
power to operate or withhold;

a circumstance which ahalfs the superstition of Gregory at the expense of his
veracity.

(3) Besides the epistles of Gregory himself, which are methodized byDupin
(Bihliotheqne Eccles. torn. v.

p. 103—125.,) we have three lives of the pone; the two first written in the
eighth and ninth centuries (de Tri-"

plici Vita St. Greg. Preface to the fourth volume of the Benedictine edition,)
by the deacons Paul (p. 1—180

and John (p. 19—188.) and containing much original, though doubtful evidence;
the third, a long and laboured

compilation by the Benedictine editors (p. 199—305.) The annals of Baronius
are a copious but partial histo­

ry. His papal prejudices are tempered by the good sense of Fleury, (Hist.
Eccles. torn, viii,) and his chronolo­

gy had been rectified by the criticism of Pagi and Muratori.

(4) John the deacon has described them like an eye-witness (lib. ir. c. 83.
84.) and his description is illus­

trated by Angelo Kocca, a Roman antiquary (St. Greg. Opera, torn. iv. p.
312—326.) who observes, that tome

Mosaics of the popes of the seventh century are still preserved in the old
churches of Rome, (p. 321—323.)

The same walls which represented Gregory's family,are now decorated with the
martyrdom of St. Andrew,

the noble contest of Dominichino and Guido.

(5) Disciplinis vera liberalibus, hoc est grammatiea, rhetorica, dialectioa,
ita a pucro est institutus, ut quam*

vis eo tempore florerent adhuc Romas studia literarum, tamen nulli in urbe
ipsa sectmdus putavettir. (Paul,

Diacon. in Vit. S. Gregor. c. ii.

(0) The Benedictines (Vit. Greg. lib. i. p. 205—208.) labour to reduce the
monasteries of Gregory within

the rule of their own order; but as the question is confessed to be doubtful,
it is clear that these powerful

monks are in the wrong. Sec Butler's Lives of the Saints, vol. iii. p. 145. a
work of merit; the sense and learn­

ing belong to the author—his prejudices are those of his profession.

(7) MonasteriumGregorianiiminejiisdem Beati Gregorii aedibus ad c'ivum Scauri
prone ccclcsiam S. S,

Johannis et Paul in honorem St. Andrew (John in Vit. Greg. lib. i. c, 0. Greg.
lib. vii. epist. 13.) This house

and monastery were situate on the side of the Celian hill which fronts the
Palatine; they are now occupied bv

the Camoldoli; San Gregorio triumphs, and St. Andrew has retired to a small
chapel. Kardini, Roma Arni­

ca, lib. iii. e. 4. p. 100. Descrizzione di Roma, torn. i. p. 442—446.

Vol-. III. 23

