OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 147

exacted, unless the offender can redeem his pardon by a fine of three hundred

pounds of copper. The decemvirs distributed with much liberality the slighter

chastisements of flagellation and servitude; and nine crimes of a very
different com­

plexion are adjudged worthy of death. 1. Any act of (reason against the
state,.or

of correspondence with the public enemy. The mode of execution was painful

and ignominious; the head of the degenerate Roman was shrouded in a veil, his

hands were tied behind his back, and, after he had been scourged by the
lictor, he

was suspended in the midst of the forum on a cross, or inauspicious tree. 2.
Noc­

turnal meetings in the city; whatever might be the pretence, of pleasure, or
reli­

gion, or the public good. 3. The murder of a citizen; for which the common
feel­

ings of mankind demanded the blood of the murderer. Poison is still, more
odious

than the sword or dagger; and we are surprised to discover, in two flagitious
events,

how early such subtle wickedness had infected the simplicity of the republic,
and

the chaste virtues of the Roman matrons.(l) The parricide who violated the du­

ties of nature and gratitude, was cast into the river or the sea, enclosed in
a sack;

and a cock, a viper, a dog, and a monkey, were successively added as the most

suitable companions. (2) Italy produces no monkeys; but the want could never
be

felt, till the middle of the sixth century first revealed the guilt of a
parricide. (3)

4. The malice of an incendiary. After the previous ceremony of whipping, "he

himself was delivered to the flames; and in this example alone our reason is
tempt­

ed to approve the justice of retaliation. 5. Judicial fierjury. The corrupt
and

malicious witness was thrown headlong from the Tarpeian rock to expiate his

falsehood, which was rendered still more fatal by the severity of the penal
laws,

and the deficiency of written evidence. 6. The corruption of a judge, who
accept­

ed bribes, to pronounce an iniquitous sentence. 7. Libels and satires, whose
rude

strains sometimes disturbed the peace of an illiterate city. The author was
beaten

with clubs, a worthy chastisement, but it is not certain that he was left to
expire

under the blows of the executioner. (4) 8. The nocturnal mischief of damaging

or destroying a neighbour's corn. The criminal was suspended as a grateful
vic­

tor to Ceres. But the Sylvan deities were less implacable, and the extirpation
of

a more valuable tree was compensated by the moderate fine of twenty-five
pounds

of copper. 9. Magical incantations; which had power, in the opinion of the
Latin

shepherds, to exhaust the strength of an enemy, to extinguish his life, and
remove

from their seats his deep-rooted plantations. The cruelty of the twelve tables

against insolvent debtors still remains to be told; and I shall dare to prefer
the lite­

ral sense of antiquity, to the specious refinements of modern criticism. (5)
After

the judicial prool or confession of the debt, thirty days of grace were
allowed be­

fore a Roman was delivered into the power of his fellow-citizens. In this
private

prison, twelve ounces of rice was his daily food; he might be bound with a
chain

of fifteen pounds weight; and his misery was thrice exposed in the market-
place,

to solicit the compassion of his friends and countrymen. At the expiration of
six­

ty days, the debt was discharged by the loss of liberty or life; the insolvent
debtor

was either put to death, or sold in foreign slavery beyond the Tiber: but if
several

creditors were alike obstinate and unrelenting, they might legally dismember
his

body, and satiate their revenge by his horrid partition. The advocates for
this

savage law have insisted, that it must strongly operate in deterring idleness
and

fraud from contracting debts which they are unable to discharge; but
experience

would dissipate this salutary terror, by proving, that no creditor could be
found to

(1) Livy mentions two remarkable and flagitious eras, of three thousand
persons accused, and of one

hundred and ninety noble matrons convicted of the crime of poisoning "(40.43.
8. 18.) Mr. Hume discrimi­

nates the ages of public and private virtue (Essays, vol. i. p. 22,23.) I
would rather say that such ebullition*

of mischief (as in I?'ranee in the year 1680.) are accidents and prodigies
which leave no marks on the manners

of a nation.

(2) The twelve tables and Cicero (pro Roscio Amerino, c. 25,26.) are content
with the sack; Seneca (Ex­

cerpt. Controvers. v. 4 ) adorns it with serpents; Juvenal pities the
guiltless monkey (innoxia simia—Satir.

xiii. 156.) Hadrian (apud Dositheuin Magistrum, lib. iii. c. 16. p. 874—876.
with Schulting's Note,) Modesti-

nus, (Pandect, xlviii. tit. 9. leg. ix.) Constantine (Cod. lib. ix. tit. 17,)
and Justinian (Institut. lib. iv. tit. 18.0

enumerate all the companions of the parricide. But this fanciful expcutiun was
simplified in practice. Hodie

tamen vivi exurumur vel ad bestias danttir (Paul. Sentent. Recept. lib. v.
tit. 24. p. 512. edit. Schulling.)

(3) The first parricide at Rome was I.. Ostius, after the second Punic war,
(Plutarch in Romulo, torn. i. p.

57.) During the Cimbric, P. Malleolus was frnilty of the first matricide,
(Lis*. Epitom. lib. lxviii.)

(4) Horace talks of the formidine fustis (lib. ii. epist. ii. 154.;) but
Cicero de Republica (lib. iv. apud Augus-

tin. de Civitat. Dei. ix. 6. in Fragment. Phitosoph. torn. iii. p. 393. edit.
Olivet.) affirms, that the decemvirs

made libels a capital offence: cum Perpaucas res capite faxissent—perpaucus I

(5) Bynkershoek (Observat. Joris. Rom. lib. i. c. 1. in Opp. torn. i. p. 9—u.)
labours to prove that the cre­

ditors divided not the body, but the price of the insolvent debtor. Yet this
interpretation is one perpetual

harsh metaphor; nor can he surmount the Roman authorities ef Qumtilian,
Ciecihus, Favonius, and Tetrtul-

lian. See Aulus Gellius, Noct. Attic. 210

