120 THE DECLINE AND FALL

of marriage, the education of children, and the authority of parents, which
may-

seem to draw their origin from nature itself, are ascribed to the untutored
wisdom

of Romulus. The law of nations and of religious worship, which Numa
introduced,

was derived from his nocturnal converse with the nymph Egeria. The civil law

is attributed to the experience of Servius: he balanced the rights and
fortunes of

the seven classes of citizens; and guarded, by fifty new regulations, the
observance

of contracts and the punishment of crimes. The state, which he had inclined
to­

wards a democracy, was changed by the last Tarquin into lawless despotism; and

•when the kingly office was abolished, the patricians engrossed the benefits
of free­

dom. The royal laws became odious or obsolete; the mysterious deposite was si­

lently preserved by the priests and nobles; and, at the end of sixty years,
the citi­

zens of Rome still complained that they were ruled by the arbitrary sentence
of

the magistrates. Yet the positive institutions of the kings had blended
themselves

with the public and private manners of the city; some fragments of that
venerable

jurisprudence(l) were compiled by the diligence of antiquarians,(2) and above

twenty texts still speak the rudeness of the Pelasgic idiom of the Latins. (3)

I shall not repeat the well-known story of the decemvirs, (4) who sullied by
their

actions the honour of inscribing on brass, or wood, or ivory, the twelve
tables

of the Roman laws. (5) They were dictated by the rigid and jealous spirit of
an

aristocracy, which had yielded with reluctance to the just demands of the
people.

But the substance of the twelve tables was adapted to the state of the city;
and the

Romans had emerged from barbarism, since they were capable of studying and

embracing the institutions of their more enlightened neighbours. A wise Ephe-

sian was driven by envy from his native country; before he could reach the
shores

of Latium, he had observed the various forms of human nature and civil
society;

he imparted his knowledge to the legislators of Rome, and a statue was erected
in

the forum to the perpetual memory of Hermodorus. (6) The names and divisions

of the copper-money, the sole coin of the infant state, were of Dorian origin
:(7)

the harvests of Campania and Sicily relieved the wants of a people whose
agricul­

ture was often interrupted by war and faction; and since the trade was
establish­

ed,^) the deputies, who sailed from the Tiber, might return from the same har­

bours with a more precious cargo of political wisdom. The colonies of Great

Greece had transported and improved the arts of their mother-country. Cumie

.and Rhegium, Crotona and Tarentum, Agrigentum and Syracuse, were in the

rank of the most flourishing cities. The disciples of Pythagoras applied
philoso­

phy to the use of government; the unwritten laws of Charondas accepted the aid

of poetry and music, (9) and Zaleucus framed the republic of the Locrians,
which

S279.,) is adopted by Gravina (Origines Juris Civilis, p. 28. edit. Lips.
1737.,) and is reluctantly admitted by

aseou, his German editor.

(1) The most ancient code or digest was styled Jus Papirianum, from the first
compiler, Papirius, who flour­

ished somewhat before or after the Regifugium. (Pandect, lib. i. tit. 2.) The
best judicial crities, eren Byn-

kershoek (torn. i. p. 284,285.) and Heineccius (Hist. J. C. R. lib. i. c.
16,17, and Opp. torn. iii. sylloge 4. p. 1—

8*0 K*Te credit to this tale of Fumponius, without sufficiently adverting to
the value and rarity of such a mo-

«ument,of the third century, of the illiterate city. 1 much suspect that the
Cains Papirius, the Pontifex

Maximus, who revived the laws of Numa (Dionys. Hal. lib. iii. p. 171.0 left
only an oral tradition; and that

the Jus Papiriannm of Granius Flaecus (Pandect, lib. i. tit. 16. leg. 144.,)
was not a commentary, but an ori­

ginal work, compiled in the time of Caesar (Censorin. de Die Natali, lib. iii.
p. 13. Duker de Latinitate, J. C.

Homaine of Terasson^p. 22—72. Paris, 1750, in folio; a work of more promise
than performance.

(3) In the year 1444, seven or eight tables of brass were dug up between
Cnrtona and Gubio. A part of

these, for the rest is Etruscan, represents the primitive state of the
Pelasgic letters and language, which are

ascribed by Herodotus to that district of Italy (lib. i. c. 56—58.) though
this difficult passage may be explained

nf a Crestona in Thrace (Notes de Larcher, torn. i. p. 256—261. The savage
dialect of the Eugubine tables

has exercised, and may still elude the divination of criticism; but the root
is undoubtedly Latin, of the same

age and character as the Saliare Carmen, which, in the time of Horace, none
could understand. The Roman

idiom, by an infusion of Doric and JSolic Greek, was gradually ripened into
the style of the twelve tables, of

the Duillian column,of Ennius, of Terence, and of Cicero (Gruter, Inscript.
lorn. i. p. 142. Scipion Maffei,

Istoria Diplomatica, p. 241—258. Bibliotheque Italique, torn. iii. p. 30—41.
174—205. torn. xiv. p. 1—52.)

_(4) Compare Livy (lib. iii. c. 31—59.) with Dionysios Halicnrnossensis (lib.
x. p. 644: xi. p. 691.) t How con­

cise and animated is the Roman—how prolix and lifeless is the Greek! Yet he
has admirably judged the

masters, and denned the rules of historical composition.

(5) From the historians, Heineccius (Hist. J. R. lib. i. No. 26.) maintains
that the twelve tables were of brass,

—sereas: in the text of Pomponius we read eboreas; for which Sealiger has
substituted roboreas (Bynkershoefc,

p. 236.) Wood, brass, and ivory, might be successively employed.

(6) His exile is mentioned by Cicero (Tuseulan; Question, 5. 36.) his statue
by Pliny (Hist. Nat. 34.11.)

The letter, dream, and prophecy of Heraclitus, are alike spurious (Epistolse
Grscc. Divers, p. 337.)

(7) This intricate subject of the Sicilian and Roman money is ably discussed
by Dr. Bentley (Dissertation

on the epistles of Phalaris, p. 427—479., whose powers in this controversy
were called forth by honour and re­

sentment.

(8) The Romans,or their allies, sailed as far as the fair promontory of Africa
(Polyb. lib. iii. p. 177. edit.

Casaubon, in folio.) Their voyages to Cumse, &c. are noticed by Livy and
Dionysius.

(9) This circumstance would alone prove the antiquity of Charondas, the
legislator of Rhegium and Cata­

