OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

and Aden the camels of the Koreishites were laden with a precious cargo of
aro-

matics; a supply of corn and manufactures was purchased in the fairs of Bostra

and Damascus; the lucrative exchange diffused plenty and riches in the streets
of

Mecca; and the noblest of her sons united the love of arms with the profession
of

merchandise.(l)

The perpetual independence of the Arabs has been the theme of praise among

strangers and natives; and the arts of controversy transform this singular
event

into a prophecy and a miracle, in favour of the posterity of Ismael.(2) Some
ex­

ceptions that can neither be dissembled nor eluded, render this mode of
reasoning

as indiscreet as it is superfluous: the kingdom of Yemen has been successively
sub­

dued by the Abyssinians, the Persians, the sultans of Egypt,(3) and the
Turks:(4)

the holy cities of Mecca and Medina have repeatedly bowed under a Scythian ty­

rant; and the Roman province of Arabia(5) embraced the peculiar wilderness in

which Ismael and his sons must have pitched their tents in the face of their
bre­

thren. Yet these exceptions are temporary or local; the body of the nation has

escaped the yoke of the most powerful monarchies; the arms of Sesostris and
Cy­

rus,, of Pompey and Trajan, could never achieve the conquest of Arabia; the
pre­

sent sovereign of the Turks(6) may exercise a shadow of jurisdiction, but his

pride is reduced to solicit the friendship of a people, whom it is dangerous
to pro­

voke, and fruitless to attack. The obvious causes of their freedom are
inscribed on

the character and country of the Arabs. Many ages before Mahomet(7) their in­

trepid valour had been severely felt by their neighbours in offensive and
defensive

war. The patient and active virtues of a soldier are insensibly nursed in the
ha­

bits and discipline of a pastoral life. The care of the sheep and camels is
aban­

doned to the women of the tribe; but the martial youth under the banner of the

emir, is ever on horseback, and in the field, to practise the exercise of the
bow,

the javelin, and the scimitar. The long memory of their independence is the

firmest pledge of its perpetuity, and succeeding generations are animated to
prove

their descent, and to maintain their inheritance. Their domestic feuds are
sus­

pended on the approach of a common enemy; and in their last hostilities
against

the Turks, the caravan of Mecca was attacked and pillaged by fourscore
thousand

of the confederates. When they advance to battle, the hope of victory is in
the

front; in the rear the assurance of a retreat. Their horses and camels, who in

eight or ten days can perform a march of four, or five hundred miles,
disappear

before the conqueror; the secret waters of the desert elude his search; and
his

victorious troops are consumed with thirst, hunger, and fatigue, in the
pursuit of

an invisible foe, who scorns his efforts, and safely reposes in the heart of
the burn­

ing solitude. The arms and deserts of the Bedoweens are not only the safe-
guards

of their own freedom, but the barriers also of the happy Arabia: whose inhabi­

tants, remote from war, are enervated by the luxury of the soil and climate.
The

legions of Augustus melted away in disease and. lassitude ;(8) and it is only
by a

naval power that the reduction of Yemen has been successfully attempted* When

(1) Mirnm dictu ex innutneris populis pars seqtta in commerciii aut in
latrociniis dcget. fPlin. Hist. Nat. 6".

32.) See Sale's Koran, Sural, 106. p. 503. Poeock, Specimen, p. 2. d'Herbelot.
Bibliot. Orient, p. 361. Pri-

deaux's Life of Mahomet, p. 5. Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, torn. i. p. 72. 120.
126, ore.

(2) A nameless doctor (Universal Hist. vol. 20. octavo edition) has formally
demonstrated ihe truth of

Christianity by the independence of the Arabs. A critic, besides the
exceptions of fact, might dispute the

meaning or the text, (Genes, xvi. 12.) the extent of the application, and the
foundation of the pedigree.

(3) It was subdued, A. D. 1173. by a brother of the great Saladin, who founded
a dynasty of Curds or Ayou-

bites (Guignes, Hist, des Huns, torn. i. p. 425. D'Herbelot, p. 477.)

(4) By the lieutenant of Soliman, (A. D. 1538.) and Selim II. (1568.) See
Cantemir's Hist, of the Othman

Empire, p. 201.221. The pasha, who resided at Saana, commanded twenty-one
beys, hut no revenue was ever

remitted to the porte. (Marsigli, Stato-Militare dell Imperio Ottomanno, p.
124.) and the Turks were ex­

pelled about the year 1630. (Nietmhr, p. 167, 168.)

(5) Of the Roman province, under the name of Arabia and the third Palestine,
the principal cities were

Bostra and Petra, which dated their era from the year 105, when they were
subdued by Palma, a lieutenant of

Trajan. (Dion. Cassius, lib. Ixviii.) Petra was the capital of the Nabathsenm,
whose name is derived from

the eldest of the sons of Ismael. (Genes, xxv. 12, See. with the Commentaries
of Jerome, Ix. Clere, and Cal-

met.) Justinian relinquished a palm country of ten days'journey to the south
of ^K'ah. (Pi-ocop. de Bell. Per-

aic. lib. i. c. 19.) and the Romans maintained a centurian and a custom-house
(Arrian in ?eriolo Marts Ery-

thrxi. p. 11. in Hudson, torn, i.) at a place (hf-x* xw/utt Pagus A thus
Hawara) in the territory of Medina. (D'An-

ville Memoiresurl'Egypte, p. 243.) These real possessions, and some naval
inroads of Trajan, (Peripl. p. 14,

15.) are magnified by history and medals into the Roman conquest of Arabia.

(0) Niebuhr (Description de I'Arabia, p. 302,303,329—331.) affords the most
recent and authentic intelligence

of the Turkish empire in Arabia.

(7) Diodorus Siculus, tom.ii. lib. xix. p. 390—393. edit. Wesseling) has
clearly exposed the freedom of the

Nabathsean Arabs, who resisted the arms of Antigonus and his son.

(8) Strabo, lib. xvi. p. 1127—1129. Plin. Hist. Natur. 6.32. Alius Galltts
landed near Medina, and marched

near a thousand miles into the nart of Yemen between Mareb and the ocean. The
non ante devictis Sabese

regibus, (Od. i. p. 29.) and the intacti Arftuiim thesauri, (Od, iii. 24.) of
Horace, attest the virgin purity of

*1 rebia.

