OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 243

the games of the hippodrome; from thence he paraded through the streets with a

thousand banners, and a thousand trumpets; refreshed himself in the baths of

Zeuxippus, and returning to the palace, entertained his nobles with a
sumptuous

banquet. At the meridian hour he withdrew to his chamber, intoxicated with

flattery and wine, and forgetful that his example had made every subject ambi­

tious, and that every ambitious subject was his secret enemy. Some bold
conspi­

rators introduced themselves into the disorder of the feast; and the
slumbering

monarch was surprised, bound, blinded, and deposed before he was sensible of
his

danger. Yet the traitors were deprived of their reward; and the free voice of
the

senate and people promoted Artemius from the office of secretary to that of

emperor: he assumed the title of Anastasius II. and displayed in a short and
trou­

bled reign the virtues both of peace and war. But after the extinction of the
im­

perial line, the rule of obedience was violated, and every change diffused the
seeds

of new revolutions. In a mutiny of the fleet, an obscure and reluctant officer
of the

revenue was forcibly invested with the purple: after some months of a naval
war,

Anastasius resigned the sceptre; and the conqueror, Theodosius III., submitted
in

his turn to the superior ascendant of Leo, the general and emperor of the
oriental

troops. His two predecessors were permitted to embrace the ecclesiastical pro­

fession: the restless impatience of Anastasius tempted him to risk and to lose
his

life in a treasonable enterprise; but the last days of Theodosius were
honourable

and secure. The single and sublime word " health," which he inscribed on his

tomb, expresses the confidence of philosophy or religion; and the fame of his
mi­

racles was long preserved among the people of Ephesus. This convenient shel­

ter of the church might sometimes impose a lesson of clemency: but it may be

questioned whether it is for the public interest to diminish the perils of
unsuccess­

ful ambition.

I have dwelt on the fall of a tyrant: I shall briefly represent the founder of
a

new dynasty, who is known to posterity by the invectives of his enemies, and
whose

public and private life is involved in the ecclesiastical story of the
Iconoclasts. Yet

in spite of the clamours of superstition, a favourable prejudice for the
character of

Leo the Isaurian, may be reasonably drawn from the obscurity of his birth, and

the duration of his reign.—I. In an age of manly spirit, the prospect of an
impe-

perial reward would have kindled every energy of the mind, and produced

a crowd of competitors as deserving as they were desirous to reign. Even in
the

corruption and debility of the modern Greeks, the elevation of a plebeian from

the last to the first rank of society, supposes some qualifications above the
level of

the multitude. He would probably be ignorant and disdainful of speculative
sci­

ence; and in the pursuit of fortune, he might absolve himself from the
obligations

of benevolence and justice; but to his character we may ascribe the useful
virtues

of prudence and fortitude, the knowledge of mankind, and the important art of

gaining their confidence and directing their passions. It is agreed that Leo
was a

native of Isauria, and that Conon was his primitive name. The writers, whose

awkward satire is praise, describe him as an itinerant pedlar, who drove an
ass

with some paltry merchandise to the country fairs; and foolishly relate that
he met

on the road some Jewish fortune-tellers, who promised him the Roman empire, on

condition that he should abolish the worship of idols. A more probable account

relates the migration of his father from Asia Minor to Thrace, where he exer­

cised the lucrative trade of a grazier; and he must have acquired considerable

wealth, since the first introduction of his son was procured by a supply of
five hun­

dred sheep to the imperial camp. His first service was in the guards of
Justinian,

where he soon attracted the notice, and by degrees, the jealousy of the
tyrant.

His valour and dexterity were conspicuous in the Colchian war: from Anastasius

he received the command of the Anatolian legions, and by the suffrage of the
sol­

diers he was raised to the empire, With the general applause of the Roman
world.

II. In this dangerous elevation, Leo III. supported himself against, the envy
of his

equals, the discontent of a powerful faction, and the assaults of his foreign
and do­

mestic enemies. The catholics, who accuse his religious innovations, are
obliged

to confess that they were undertaken with temper, and conducted with firmness.

Their silence respects the wisdom of his administration and the purity of his
man­

ners. After a reign of twenty-four years, he peaceably expired in his palace
of

Constantinople; and the purple which he had acquired, was transmitted by the

right of inheritance to the third generation.

In the long reign of thirty-four years, the son and successor of Leo,
Constantine

V, surnamedCopronymus, attacked with less temperate zeal the images or idols

