3SS THE BECLINE AND FALL

their eastern progenitors. 1'he victorious though motley bands of Tarik and

Musa asserted, by the name of Spaniards, their original claim of conquest; yet

thev allowed their brethren of Egypt to share their establishments of Murcia
and

Lisbon. The royal legion of Damascus was planted at Cordova; that of Emesa

at Seville; that of Kinnisrin or Chalcis at Jaen; that of Palestine at
Algezire and

Medina Sidonia. The natives of Yemen and Persia were scattered around Toledo

and the inland country; and the fertile seats of Grenada, were bestowed on ten

thousand horsemen of Syria and Irak, the children of the purest and most noble

of the Arabian tribes. (1) A spirit of emulation, sometimes beneficial, more
fre­

quently dangerous, was nourished by these hereditary factions. Ten years after

the conquest, a map of the province'was presented to the caliph: the seas, the
ri­

vers, and the harbours, the inhabitants and cities, the climate, the soil, and
the

mineral productions of the earth. (2) In the space of two centuries, the gifts
of

nature were improved by the agriculture,(3) the manufactures, and the commerce

of an industrious people; and the effects of their diligence have been
magnified by

the idleness of iheir fancy. The first of the Ommiades who reigned in Spain
so­

licited the support of the Christians; and, in his edict of peace and
protection, he

contents himself with a modest imposition of ten thousand ounces of gold, ten

thousand pounds of silver, ten thousand horses, as many mules, one thousand
cui­

rasses, with an equal number of helmets and lances. (4) The most powerful.of

his successors derived from the same kingdom the annual tribute of twelve mil­

lions and forty-five thousand dinars or pieces of gold, about six millions of
sterling

money;(5) a sum which, in the tenth century, most probably surpassed the
united

revenues of the Christian monarchs. His royal seat of Cordova contained six

hundred moschs, nine hundred baths, and two hundred thousand houses: he gave

laws to eighty cities of the first, to three hundred of the second and third,
order;

and the fertile banks of the Guadalquiver were adorned with twelve thousand
vil­

lages and hamlets. The Arabs might exaggerate the truth, but they created and

they describe the most prosperous era of the riches, the cultivation, and the
popu-

lousness of Spain. (6)

The wars of the Moslems were sanctified by the prophet; but among the va­

rious precepts and examples, of his life, the caliphs selected the lessons of
tole­

ration that might tend to disarm the resistance of the unbelievers. Arabia was

the temple and patrimony of the God of Mahomet; but he beheld with less jea­

lousy and affection the nations of the earth. The polytheists and idolaters
who

•were ignorant of his name, might be lawfully extirpated by his votaries, (7)
but a

wise policy supplied the obligation of justice; and after some acts of
intolerant zeal

the Mahometan conquerors of Hindostan have spared the pagods of that devout

and populous country. The disciples of Abraham, of Moses, and of Jesus, were

solemnly invited to accept the more fierftct revelation of Mahomet; but if
they

preferred the payment of a moderate tribute, they were entitled to the freedom

(1) Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, torn. ii. p. 32. 252. The former of these
quotations is taken from a Biographic

Hispanica, by an Arabian of Valentia; (see the copious extracts of Casiri.
torn. it. p. 30—121.) and the latter

from a general chronology of the Caliphs, and of the African and Spanish
Dynasties, with a particular History

of the Kingdom of Grenada,of which Casiri has given almost an entireversion.
(Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn,

ii. p. 177—3190 The author Ebn Khateb, a native of Grenada, and a cotemporary
of Novairi and Abtilfeda,

(born A. D. 1313, died A. D. 1374.) was an historian, geographer, physician,
poet, &c. (torn. ii. p. 71,72.)

(2) Cardonne, Hist, de PAfrique et de i'Espagne, torn. iv. p. 116,117.

(3) A copious treatise of husbandry, by an Arabian of Seville, in the twelfth
century, is in the Escurial li­

brary, and Casiri had some thoughts of translating it. He gives a list of the
authors quoted, Arabs as well as

Greeks, Latins, 8cc; but it is much if the Andalusiau saw these strangers
through the medium of countryman

Columella. Casiri, Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. i. p. 323—338.)

(4\ Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, torn. ii. p. 104. Casiri translates the original
testimony of the historian Rasis,

as it is alleged, in the Arabic Bingraphia Hispanica, pars 9. But I am most
exceedingly surprised at the ad­

dress, Frincipibni cseteriique Christianis Hispanis suis Castellte. The name
of Castellae was unknown in the

eighth century; the kingdom was not erected till the year 1022, a hundred
years after the time of Rasis, (Bi­

bliot. torn. ii. p. 330.) and the appellation was always expressive, not of a
tributary province, but of a line of

castles independent of the Moorish yoke. (D'Anville, Etats tie I'Europe, p.
166—170.) Had Casiri been a cri­

tic, he would have cleared a difficulty, perhaps of his own making.

(5) Cardonne, lorn. i. p. 337,338. He computes the revenue at one hundred and
thirty millions of French

livres. The entire picture of peace and prosperity relieves the bloody
uniformity of the Moorish annals.

(6) I am happy enough to possess a splendid and interesting work, which has
only been distributed in pre­

sents by the court oi Msdrid; Bibliethtca Arabico-Hispana Escurialensis, Optra
et studio Michaelis Casiri, Sure-

Maronitai: Macriti, in/olio, tomus prior, 1760, tomus posterior, 1770. The
execution of this work does honour

to the Spanish press: the MSS. to the number of one thousand eight hundred and
fifty-one, are judiciously

classed by the editor, and Ins copious extracts throw some light on the
Mahometan literature and history of

Spain. These relics are now secure, but the task has been supinely delayed,
till, in the year 1671, a fire con­

sumed the greatest part of the Escurial library, rich in the spoils of Grenada
and Morocco.

(7) The Habii, as they are styled, qui tolerari niqueunt, are, 1. .Those who,
besides God, worship the sun,

moon, or idols. 2. Atheists. Utnqui, quanidiu princeps aliquis inter
Mahommedanos superest, oppugnari de-

bent donee religionem ampleciantur, nee requies iis concedenda est, nec
pretium acceptandum pro obtinenda

eonicuntiK libertate: (Reland, Dissertat. 10. dejure Miliari Mohamin-tlan.
torn. iii. p. 14.) a rigid theory!

