OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, qs)

By, his marriage with this impious woman, Romanus the younger left two sons,

Basil II. and Constantine IX. and two daughters, Theophano and Anne. The

eldest sister was given to Otho II. emperor of the west; the younger became
the

wife of Wolodomir, great duke and apostle of Russia, and by the marriage of
her

grand-daughter with Henry I. king of France, the blood of the Macedonians, and

perhaps of the Arsacides, still flows in the veins of the Bourbon line. After
the

death of her husband, the empress aspired to reign in the name of her sons,
the

elder of whom was five, and the younger only two years of age; but she soon
felt

the instability of a throne, which was supported by a female who could not be
es­

teemed, and two infants who could not be feared. Theophano looked around for

a protector, and threw herself into the arms of the bravest soldier: her heart
was

capricious; but the deformity of the new favourite rendered it more probable
that

interest was the motive and excuse of her love. Nicephorus Phocas united, in
the

popular opinion, the double merit of a hero and a saint. In the former
character,

his qualifications were genuine and splendid: the descendant of a race,
illustrious

by their military exploits, he had displayed in every station, and in every
pro­

vince, the courage of a soldier and the conduct of a chief; and Nicephorus was

crowned with recent laurels, from the important conquest of the isle of Crete.
His

religion was of a more ambiguous cast; and his hair-cloth, his fasts, his
pious idiom,

and his wish to retire from the business of the world, were a convenient mask
for

his dark and dangerous ambition. Yet he imposed on a holy patriarch, by whose

influence, and by a decree of the senate, he was intrusted, during the
minority of

the young princes, with the absolute and independent command of the oriental

armies. As soon as he had secured the leaders and the troops, he boldly
marched

to Constantinople, trampled on his enemies, avowed his correspondence with the

empress, and, without degrading her sons, assumed, with the title of Augustus,

the pre-eminence of rank and the plenitude of power. But his marriage with

Theophano was refused by the same patriarch who had placed the crown on his

head; by his second nuptials he incurred a year of canonical penance; a bar of

spiritual affinity was opposed to their celebration; and some evasion and
perjury

were required to silence the scruples of the clergy and people. The popularity

of the emperor was lost in the purple: in a reign of six years he provoked the
ha­

tred of strangers and subjects, and the hypocrisy and avarice of the first
Nice­

phorus were revived in his successor. Hypocrisy I shall never justify or
palliate;

but I will dare to observe, that the odious vice of avarice is of all others
most

hastily arraigned, and most unmercifully condemned. In a private citizen, ouy

judgment seldom expects an accurate scrutiny into his fortune and expense: and
in

a steward of the public treasure, frugality is always a virtue, and the
increase of

taxes too often an indispensable duty. In the use of his patrimony, the
generous

temper of Nicephorus had been proved; and the revenue was strictly applied to

the service of the state: each spring the emperor marched in person against
the

Saracens; and every Roman might compute the employment of his taxes in tri­

umphs, conquests, and the security of the eastern barrier.

Among the warriors who promoted his elevation, and served under his standard,

a noble and Valiant Armenian had deserved and obtained the most eminent re­

wards. The statue of John Zimisces was below the ordinary standard; but this

diminutive body was endowed with strength, beauty, and the soul of a hero. By

the jealousy of the emperor's brother, he was degraded from the office of
general

of the east, to that of director of the posts, and his murmurs were chastised
with

disgrace and exile. But Zimisces was ranked among the numerous lovers of the

empress: on her intercession he was permitted to reside at Chalcedon, in the
neigh­

bourhood of the capital: her bounty was repaid in his clandestine and amorous
visits

to the palace; and Theophano consented with alacrity to the death of an ugly
and

penurious husband. Some bold and trusty conspirators were concealed in her
most

private chambers; in the darkness of a winter night, Zimisces, with his
principal

companions, embarked in a small boat, traversed the Bosphorus, landed at the

palace stairs, and silently ascended a ladder of ropes, which was cast down by
the

female attendants. Neither his own suspicions, nor the warnings of his
friends,

nor the tardy aid of his brother Leo, nor the fortress which he had erected in
the

palace, could protect Nicephorus from a domestic foe, at whose voice every
door

was opened to the assassins. As he slept on a bear-skin on the ground, ho was

roused by their noisy intrusion, and thirty daggers glittered before his eyes.
It is

doubtful whether Zimisces imbrued his hands in the blood of his sovereign; but
he

enjoyed the inhuman spectacle of revenge. The murder was protracted by insult

