68f. PYLUS. FTBA5C&

mentions Mcswnia as his birthplace (Panatk. § 72"); ! the position of the
Messenian Pylos, \ht ran

ami Phoreeydes («;>. Schol «J //om. 0e/. xi. 289) ; striking upon the whole
western coast of Pd-pc

ami Eustathius {ad iii. p. 1454) describes tlie nesus, was far more likely to
have attract*! lit

Messenian Pylus as tin.1 city founded by Peleus. 1 Thessalian wanderers from
Iolcoa, the wor>Ubp»i

This was also the opinion of Diodorus (xv. CO), and 1 of the g'xi Poseidon,
than a site which wis Der*.j«

of manv others. In opposition to their views, strong by nature nor near the
coast.

Strabo, following the opinion of the 'OnTjptK&Tcpoi, lint although we may
conclude that tfvM*«wrj»

argues at great length that the Triphylian Klis was Pylus was the city of
Nestor, it may admit of

the city of Nestor. (Strab. viii. pp. 339, seq., 348, whether the city itself
existed un the promcer-fi

seq.) He maintains that the description of the Coryphasium from the earliest
times. Tbc Gtt**j

Alpheius flowing through the land of the Py liana rarely built a city in the
earliest jvnad immtdaim

(//. v. 545), wliirh, as we have already seen, was upon the coast, and still
more randy chose a ctf *>

the only argument which the Eleians could adduce badly supplied with water as
Coryphadinm,rf »rrt

for their claim, is applicable to the Triphylian the Athenians experienced the
incoDvenreacf **■

Pvlus; whereas the poet's mention of Nestor's ex- they defended it in the
Peloponne>ian War. Tl«

ploits against the Epeians (//. xi. 670, seq.) is seems much probability in
the account of Sen*

fatal to the supposition of the Messenian city being (viii. p. 3.j9) that the
ancient Messenian Pj'cfm

his residence. Nestor is described as making an situated at the foot of Mt.
Aegalem, and thai 5f«

incursion into the country of the Epeians, and re- its destruction some of its
inhabitants lerJk ft

turning thence with a large quantity of cattle, which Coryphasium. If then we
suppose the city erf X***

he safely lodges by night in the Ncleian city. The to have stood a little way
inland, and C -rypiasia

third day the Epeians, having collected their forces to have lteen its port-
town, the narrative \A T»*"

on the Alpheius, Nestor inarched forth from Pylus, much us' return becomes
perfectly clear. N^

and at the end of the first day halted at the to lose time at the royal
residence, he drives sen;*

Minyeius (subsequently called the Anigrns), where to tlie port and goes
quietly on bard, H«rr. <■!

he passed the night; starting from thence on the of Strabo's most serious
objections t^ the Man

following morning, he arrived at the Alpheius at Pylus disappears. Strain was
justified inaeei^ctt

noon. Strabo argues that neither of these events a separate site for the city
and the p-rt, k-*r. ■

could have taken place if Nestor had inarched from seems to have forgotten the
existence trf tat 'lli

so distant a city as the one at Coryphasium. while Pylus inland, which be had
hinru-eif mtoi

they might easily have happened if the Ncleian city (Leake. Mtyrea, vol. i. p.
416. so>}.; Coraia. iV

had been situated at the Triphylian Pylus. Again lojxmnesos, vol. ii. p. 174,
seq.)

he argues from the Odyssey that the Neleid Pylus PYKAKI, a people in Ulyria
(PIin. iii. 21 %H

could not have been on the sea-coast, since Tele- t Mela, ii. 3. § 12),
perhaps the same as tie fts*

machus, after he had disembarked at the temple of of Strabo. [Plkkaki ]

Poseidon and had proceeded to Pylus, sent a courier! PYKA'MIA. [Argo9, p. 202.
a»]

to his ship to fetch his companions (Od. iii. 423); PY'RAMUS (Uvpauos). one of
the rr*»t p*<

and on his return from Sparta to Pylos, he desired of Asia Minor, which baa
its sotirrr*. in Catt*

Pisistratus to turn oil' to the sea-side, that he might near the town of
Arabissus. (:*traS. L p. 51»

immediately embark, as he wished not to be de- p. G75.) For a time it passes
under grout*., to

tained in the city by Nestor. (Od. xv. 199, seq.) then comes forward again a*
a narigahi* riw, si

These arguments, as well as others, adduced by forces its way through a glen
of Jtfoutf Tiaci

Strabo. have convinced K. 0. Mitller (Orehomeruig, which in some j«rts is so
narrow that a 6iz s

p. 357, seq.), Thirlwall {Hist of (inter, vol. i. leap across it. (Strab. xii.
p. 536.) It? case

p. 96), and several modern scholars; but Leake which until then had been
south, now tare** I

Curtius, and others have adhered, with much south-west, and reaches the sea at
M*2h» ii Crirf

greater probability, to the more common view of This river is deep and rapid
(Taetx* *x£ Lr*$

antiquity, that the Neleian Pylus was situated at 440); its average breadth
was 1 stadium (X*ts|

Coryphasium. It has been shown that Pylus was Anab. i. 4. § 1). but it carried
with ii si*efe t^ai

frequently used by Homer to signify the Neleid tity of mud. that, according to
an ancient nk,

kingdom, and not simply the city, as indeed Strabo deposits were one day to
rearh the island

himself had admitted when arguing against the and thus unite it with the
mainland. (Str^L i

claims of the Eleian Pylus. Moreover, even if it Eustath. ad IMonyg. 867.)
Stephanus K. (a.

should be admitted that the account of Nestor's states that formerly this
river had bwa, caL*J U

exploits against the Epeians agrees better with the cosyrus. (C'oinp, Scylaz,
p. 40; Ptoi. ». 3. §

claim of the Triphylian Pylus, yet the narrative of the Plin. v. 22; Pomp.
Mela, i. 13; Comas, sw

journeys of Telemachus is entirely opposed to this Arrian, Anab. ii. 5. § 8.)
Its metiers

claim. Telemachus in going from Pylus to Sparta Seifnm or Jechiin* fL

drove his horses thither, without changing them, in | PYRANTHl'S {Tl&pa*9os:
Fih. Tlt^aHWx

two days, stopping the fir>t night at Plierae {Od. small town in Crete, near
Gortvn, prv^aa^v

iii. 485); and lie returned from Sparta to Pylus in modern Pyrothi, (Steph. B.
s. r. ?. PasiiifT, O*

the same manner. (Od. xv. 182. seq.) Now the vol. i. p. 291.)

Messenian Pylus, Pherae, and Sparta, lie in a direct PYKASUS (ntfparor, Strab,
St^ph. J?, a

line, the distance from Pylus to Pherae being about rii'pfWoy,Horn:
Kth.nvpatra7os').* town v^ Pisa

35 miles by the mad. and from Plierae to Sparta in Thessaly, mentioned by
Homer aloa£ wnb FVi

about 28 miles. On the other hand, the road from and Iton, and described by
him as riLr W— im

tlie Triphylian Pylus to Sparta would have been > ^tvja, &i)txr)Tpos Ttutvos.
(/iii.6y5,> frs

by the valley of the Alpheius into that of the was situated on the Paga-saean
gn\f, at t>*

Eurotas; whereas Pherae would have been out of ; of 20 stadia from Thebes, and
p<<s^e^a4 a f>

the way. and the distance to it would have been harbour (tuAiTuvo*, Strab. ix.
p. 43o i. I: A

much mere than a day's journey, lie-ides which , disappeared in the time of
Strajjc. lu MM*

