CHAP. XLIV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 317

observance of contracts and the punishment of crimes.

The state, which he had inclined towards a democracy,

was changed by the lastTarquin into lawless despotism;

and when the kingly office was abolished, the patricians

engrossed the benefits of freedom. The royal laws be­

came odious or obsolete; the mysterious deposit was si­

lently preserved by the priests and nobles; and, at the

end of sixty years, the citizens of Rome still complained

that they were ruled by the arbitrary sentence of the ma­

gistrates. Yet the positive institutions of the kings had

blended themselves with the public and private manners

of the city; some fragments of that venerable jurispru­

dence11 were compiled by the diligence of antiquarians,'

and above twenty texts still speak the rudeness of the

Pelasgic idiom of the Latins."

I shall not repeat the well-known story of the decern- The twelve

tables of

virs,1 who sullied by their actions the honour of inscrib- the do­

ing on brass, or wood, or ivory, the twelve tables ofcemTI"'

the Roman laws'.'" They were dictated by the rigid and

h The most ancient code or digest was styled Jus Papirianum, from the first
com­

piler, Papirios, who flourished somewhat before or after the Regifugium.
(Pandect.

lib. 1. tit. 2.) The best judicial critics, even Bynkersbuek, (tom. 1. p. 284,
285.)

and Hcineccius, (Hist. J. C. R. lib. 1. o. 16,17. and Opp. tom. 3. sylloge 4.
p. 1—8.)

give credit to this tale of Postponins, without sufficiently adverting to the
value and

rarity of such a monument of the third century, of Ihe, illiterate city. I
much suspect

that the Caius Papirius^ Ihe Pontifex Maximus, who revived the laws of Numa,

(Dionys. Hal. lib. 3. p. 171.) left only an oral tradition ; and that the Jus
Fapirianuo)

of Granius Flaccus, (Pandect, lib. 50. tit. 16. leg. 144.) was not a
commentary, but

an originol work, compiled in the time of Caesar. (Censorin. de Die Natali,
lib. 5.

p. 13. Duker de Latinitate J. C. p. 157.)

* A pompous, though feeble, attempt to restore the original, is made in the His-  
toire de la Jurisprudence Romaine of Terasson, p. 22—72. Paris, 1750, in
folio; a

work of more promise than performance.

1 In the year 1444, seven or eight tables of brass were dng up between Cortona

and Gnhio. A part of these, for the rest is Etruscan, represents the primitive
state

of the Pelasgic letters and language, which are ascribed by Herodotus to that
district

of Italy, (lib. 1. c. 56—58.) though this difficult passage may be explained
pf a

Crestona in Thrace. (Notes de Larcher, tom. 1. p. 256—261.) The savage dialect

of the Euguhine tables has exercised, and may still elude, the divination of
criticism;

but the root is undoubtedly Latin, of the same age and character as the
Saliare Car­

men, which, in the time of Horace, none could understand. The Roman idiom, by

an infusion of Doric and jEolic Greek, was gradually ripened into the style of
the

twelve tables, of the Duillian column, of Ennius, of Terence, and of Cicero.
(Grnter,

Inscript. tom. 1. p. 142. Soipion Maflfei, Istoria Diplomatics, p. 241—258.
Biblio-

theque Italique, tom. 3. p. 30—41. 174—205 ; tom. 14. p. 1—52.)

1 Compare Livy (lib. 3. o. 31—59.) with Dionysius Halicarnassensis. (lib. 10.

p. 644; 11. p. 691.) How concise and animated is the Roman—how prolix and
life­

less is the Greek ? Yet he has admirably judged the masters, and defined the
rules, of

historical composition.

P From the historians, Hcineccius (Hilt. J. R. lib. 1. no. 26.) maintains that
(hi

