CHAP. XLV.] OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

fruits of the earth. Within less than seventy years, this

artificial system was abolished by a more simple and solid

tenure.' Either the Roman landlord was expelled by his

strong and insolent guest; or the annual payment, a

third of the produce, was exchanged by a more equitable

transaction for an adequate proportion of landed property.

Under these foreign masters, the business of agriculture,

in the cultivation of corn, vines, and olives, was exercised

with degenerate skill and industry by the labour of the

slaves and natives. But the occupations of a pastoral life

were more pleasing to the idleness of the barbarians. In

the rich meadows of Venetia, they restored and improved

the breed of horses for which that province had once

been illustrious ;u and the Italians beheld with asto­

nishment a foreign race of oxen or buffaloes." The de­

population of Lombardy, and the increase of forests, af­

forded an ample range for the pleasures of the chace.y

That marvellous art which teaches the birds of the air to

acknowledge the voice, and execute the commands, of

their master, had been unknown to the ingenuity of the

Greeks and Romans.2 Scandinavia and Scythia produce

t Paul, lib. 2. c. 31, 32. lib. 3. c. 16. The laws of Rotharis, promulgaied A.
D.

643. do not contain the smallest vestige of this payment of thirds; but they
pre­

serve many curious circumstances of the state of Italy and the manners of the
Lom-

hards.

11 The studs of Dionysius of Syracuse, and his frequent victories in the
Olympic

games, had diffused among the Greeks the fame of the Venetian horses ; but the
breed

was extinct in the time of Strabo. (lib. 5. p. 325.) Gisulf obtained from his
uncle

gcnerosarum equarum greges. Paul, lib. 2. c. 9. The Lomhards afterward intro­

duced cahalli sylvatici—wild horses. Pan I, lib. 4. c. 11.

v Tunc (A. D. 596.)primum, buhali in Ttaliam delati Italiae populis miracula
fuere.

(Paul Warnefrid, lib. 4. c. 11.) The buffaloes, whose native climate appears
to be

Africa and India, are unknowu to Europe, except in Italy, where they are
numerous

and useful. The ancients were ignorant of these animals, unless Aristotle
(Hist.

Animal, lib. 2. c. 1. p. 58. Paris 1783.) has described them as the wild oxen
of Ara-

chosia. See Buffon. Hist. Naturelle, tom. 11. and Supplement, tom. 6; Hist.
Gene-

rale des Voyages, tom. 1. p. 7. 481; 2.105 ; 3. 291 :4. 234.461; 5. 193 ; 6.
491; 8.

400 ; 10. 666; Pennant's Quadrupedes, p. 24; Dictionaire d'Hist. Naturelle,
par Val-

mont de Romare, tom. 2. p. 74. Yet I must not conceal the suspicion that Paul,
by

a vulgar error, may have applied the name of buhalus to the aurochs, or wild
bull, of

ancient Germany.

y Consult the twenty-first Dissertation of Muratori.

1 Their ignorance is proved by the silence even of those who professedly treat
of

the arts of hunting and the history of animals. Aristotle, (Hist. Animal, lib.
9. o. 36.

tom. 1. p. 586. and the notes of his last editor, M. Camus, tom. 2. p. 314.)
Pliny,

(Hist. Natur. lib. 10. c. 10.) iElian, (de Natur. Animal, lib. 2. c. 42.) and
perhaps

Homer, (Odyss. 22. 302—306.) describe with astonishment a tacit league and
com­

mon chace between the hawks and the Thracian fowlers.

