CHAP. XLIX. 11)1

loyalty,' On this occasion, the effects of love and hatred

are the same; and the zealous Protestants, who seek to

kindle the indignation, and to alarm the fears, of princes

«id magistrates, expatiate on the insolence and trea­

son of the two Gregories against their lawful sove­

reign/ They are defended only by the moderate Ca­

tholics, for the most part, of the Gallican church," who

respect the saint, without approving the sin. These

common advocates of the crown and the mitre circum­

scribe the truth of facts by the rule of equity, Scripture,

and tradition; and appeal11 to the evidence of the Latins,

and the liv-es' and epistles of the popes themselves.

E . a s f '^wo orig'nal epistles from Gregory II. to

Gregory n. the emperor Leo, are still extant ;k and if they

cannot be praised as the most perfect models

ojp elOqUence and logic, they exhibit the por­

trait, or at least the mask, of the founder of the Papal

'Quod si Christiani ohm non deposuerunt Neronem aut .Tulkumm, id fait cluia

'Ifi-tuuT vires temporalea Christianis. (Hours! Bellarmine, d» Rorn. Pont.
lib. .'>.

o. 7.) Cardinal Perron adds a distinction more banoorable to the first
Christians,

but not more satisfactory to modern princes—the treaum of heretics and
apostates,

who break their oath, belie their coin, and renounce their allegiance to
Christ and

hi* near. (Perroniana, p. 89-)

'Take, as a specimen, the cautious Basnage, (Hist, de' 1'Eglise, p.
1350,135J.)

and the vehement Spanheim (Hist. Imaginum), who, with a huidred more, tread

in the footsteps of the centuriators of Magdeburgh.

* SeeLannoy, {Opera, torn.5.pars2.-epist.7.7.p.456—*74.)NataIis Alexan­  
der, (Hist. Nov. Testamenti, secul. 8. dissert. 1. p. 92—96.) Pagi, (Critica,
torn.

3. p. 2)5, 316.) and Giannone, (Istoria Civile di Napoli, torn. 1. p.
317—320.) a

disciple of the Gallican school. In the fieJd of controversy I always pity the
mode­

rate party, who stand on the open middle ground, exposed to the fire on both
sides.

b They appealed to Paul Warnefrid, or Diaconue, (de Gestis Langobard. lib. 6.

c. 49. p 506, 507. in Script. Ital. Muratori, torn. 1. pars. 1.) and the
nominal

Anastasitn, (de Vit. Pont, in Muratori, torn. 3. pars. 1.) Gregorius II. p.
154.

Oregorius III. p. 158. Zacharias, p. 161. Slephanus III. p. 165. Paulus, p.
173.

Stephanas IV. p. 174. HaJrianus, p. 179. Leo III. p. 195. Yet 1 may remark,

that the true Anastasius (Hist. Ecctes. p. 134. edit. Reg.) and the Historia
Mis-

cella, (lib. 21. p. 151. in torn. 1. Script. Ital.) both of the ninth century,
translate

and approve the Greek text of Thoophanes.

1 With some minute difference, the most learned critics, Lucas Holstenius,

Schelestrate, Ciampini, Bianchini, Muratori, (Prolegomena ad torn. 3. pars.
1.)

are agreed that the Liber Pontificalia was composed and continued by the
aposto­

lical librarians and notaries of the eighth and ninth centuries; and that the
last

and smallest part is the work of Anastasius, whose name it bears. The style is

barbarous, the narrative partial, the details are trifling—yet it must be read
as a

curious and authentic record of the times. The epistles of the popes are
dispersed

in the volumes of Councils.

k The two epistles of Gregory II. have been preserved in the Acts of the \i

eene Council, (torn. 8. p.6Sl—674.) They are without a date, which u variously

fixed, by Baronius in the year 726, by Muratori (Annali d'ltalia, torn. 6. p.
120.)

in 73,9, and by Pagi in 730. Such is the force of prejudice, that some Papists

have praised the good sense and moderation of thrse letters.

