CHAP. L. 25S

his throne on the ruins of Christianity and of Rome.

The genius of the Arabian prophet, the manners of his

nation, and the spirit of his religion, involve the causes

of the decline and fall of the eastern empire; and our

eyes are curiously intent on one of the most memorable

revolutions which have impressed a new and lasting

character on the nations of the globe.3

In the vacant space between Persia, Syria,

tim of Egypt, and Ethiopia, the Arabian peninsula11

may be conceived as a triangle of spacious but

irregular dimensions. From the northern point of Bel«ac

on the Euphrates, a line of fifteen hundred miles is

terminated by the straits of Babelmandel and the land

of frankincense. About half this length may be allowed

for the middle breadth from east to west, from Bassora

to Suez, from the Persian gulf to the Red sea.d The

sides of the triangle are gradually enlarged, and the

1 As in this and the following chapter I shall display much Arabic learning, I

must profess my total ignorance of the oriental tongues, and my gratitude to
the

learned interpreters, who have transfused their science into the Latin,
French,

and English languages. Their collections, versions, and histories, 1 shall
occa­

sionally notice.

k The geographers of Arabia may be divided into three classes.—1. The Grecla
and

latins, whose progressive know ledge may be traced in Agatharcides,(de Mari
Rubro,

in Hudson, Oeograph. Minor, torn. 1.) Diodorus Siculus, (torn. 1. lib. 3. p.
159—•

167. lib. 3. p. 311—*16. edit. Wesseling) Strabo, (lib. 16. p. 1112—1114. from

Eratosthenes, p. 1122—1132. from Artemidorus)Dionysius,(Periegesis,9i7—969.)

Pliny, (Ilist. Natur. 5. 1 a. 6. 32.) and Ptolemy. (Dcscript. et Tabulae
Urbium, in

Hudson, torn. 3.) 2. The Arabic writers, who have treated the subject with the
zeal

of patriotism or devotion: the extracts of Pocock (Specimen Hist. Arabum, p.
125—

128.) from the Geography of-the Sheriff al Kdrissi, render us still more
dissatisfied

with the version or abridgment (p. 24—27.44—56. 108, &C. 119, &c.) which the

Maronites have published under the absurd title of Geographia Nubiensis;
(Paris,

1619.) but the Latin and French translators, Graves (in Hudson, torn. 3.) and
Gal-

land, (Voyage de la Palestine par la Roque, p. 265—346.) have opened to us the

Arabic of Abulfeda, the most copious and correct account of the peninsula,
which

may be enriched, however, from the Bibliotheque Orientale of D'Herbelot, p.
I3O.

et alibi passirn. 3. The European travelltrs, among whom Shaw (p. 438—155.)
and

Niebuhr (Description, 1773, Voyages, torn. 1. 1776.) deserve an honourable
distinc­

tion: Busching (Geographic par Beringer, torn. 8. p. 416—510.) has compiled

with judgment; and d Anville's maps (Orbis Veteribus Notus, and Ire Partie de

1'Asie) should lie before the reader, with his Geographic Ancienne, torn. 2.

p. 208—231.

» Abnlfed. Descript. Arabiae, p. 1. Danville, 1'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 19,
3O.

It was in this place, the paradise or garden of a satrap, that Xenophon and
the

Greeks first passed the Euphrates. (Anabasis, lib. 1. c. 10. p. 29. edit.
Wells.)

'' Reland has proved, with much superfluous learning, 1. That our Red sea (the

Arabian gulf)is no more than apartof the Mar* iRubrum, the Epu8fii QaXiurirn
of the

ancients, which was extended to the indefinite space of the Indian ocean. 2.
That

the synonymous words fp3p; iuflio4-, alluded to the colour of the blacto or
the

negroes. (Dissert. Miecell, torn, 1. p. 591—617.)

